
Text Nr. 157 (Zurück zur Übersicht)
Titel: Rede von Bundeskanzler Schröder in der Haushaltsdebatte vor dem Bundestag
Redner(in): Gerhard Schröder
Datum: 13.09.2000
Quelle (nicht mehr verfügbar) : http://archiv.bundesregierung.de/bpaexport/rede/67/18467/multi.htm
GB
2-4
Helmut Schmidt wrote in the "time" of last Thursday: Is DM 2.20 a catastrophe for us or for the euro and Wim Duisenberg, the president of the European Central Bank? Was DM 3.45 an even bigger catastrophe for the German Mark or for Kohl and the former Federal Bank Chairman Pöhl? Was DM 1.38 a disaster for Clinton and the dollar? Then comes a reminder that you should at least listen to: Friends, stop whining! Messrs. Koch, Rüttgers and Comrades, unfortunately also Mrs. Merkel - It's here. I quote Helmut Schmidt, whom you always like to quote. I quote further: Friends, stop whining! I underline this three times: Stop it! Messrs. Koch, Rüttgers and comrades, and unfortunately also Mrs. Merkel, are recommended to study the ups and downs of the curve before appearing as currency experts. This is an advice from my venerable predecessor, which I strongly recommend to you, not least the one who will certainly talk to me and certainly has to contribute to the one or the other, an advice that I, Mr. Gerhardt, and your employees To recommend to employees for critical review.

3-2
By the way: Of course, the comments of Mr. Glos were very interesting, and not only because of his language skills, which I really enjoy - I have to admit that the whole thing, dear Michael Glos, had at times less the appearance of a parliamentary speech, than a Büttenrede , You seem to have overlooked that we are still before November 11 of this year. After that, more is possible. They are certainly capable of improvement. Anyway, it's fun to listen to you. I do not want to deny that at all. But they talked about supposedly galloping inflation. In August, the inflation rate was 1.8 percent, lower than anywhere else in Europe. From a real gallop you can hardly talk about this data. The truth is: we expect economic growth of 3 percent this year. We have a reduction in unemployment, especially youth unemployment - I'll come back to that - with an inflation rate below 2%. That's - if you do not want to be true - brilliant overall economic data that you have never achieved in your reign. As simple as that.

4-1
It is no wonder, therefore, that in view of this situation, the European Central Bank - really not a gathering of Social Democrats - says: For 20 years - I emphasize: for 20 years - the economic situation in Germany was not as good as it is today. - Please deal with the facts, with the real lines of development of politics in Germany, with what will help us in the medium and long term, and let these short-winded campaigns that may provide you with a short-term relief with your difficulties But in the long term you will only fall into the political defensive. That's okay by me. What are the causes of this data and what is the success that lies in them? He lies - you can not underline this often enough - not least of all on a consolidation policy for which the name Hans Eichel stands.

4-4
[Why ? We make it clear that sound finances must and must follow the principle of sustainability. Sustainability here means that during our time in life we ??do not eat what our children and grandchildren want and need to live on. The solid Eichel fiscal policy is not least a requirement of fairness to future generations. That's why we are serious about debt reduction. Therefore, contrary to vociferous demands from the right-hand side of the house, we are not using the proceeds of auctioning UMTS licenses to reduce debt, not because there are no tasks, Mr. Gysi, whom we would like to tackle and fund immediately because we do not know that some of the demands you have made are quite understandable, and not because we would not like to fulfill these tasks - that is not the point - but because we are between the possibilities to use the money from the auction to help us, the now living and active generation, and the opportunity to use this money for the sake of sustainability for future generations, and because we know that we can spend the money only once and that, in the interests of our children and grandchildren, we must put it into debt reduction if we live up to our responsibility to them want. That's the real reason.]
That's why the debts will be substantially reduced this year, by the way, for the first time in 30 years. Next year, debt will be below the Maastricht criterion of 58 per cent of gross domestic product. This is the case earlier than planned. That is - in Europe - synonymous reasonable.
