
Sarkozy 2-7-07
5-9
The vote by qualified majority allow you to decide and act. I think of cooperation against crime. I think of the energy policy in Europe, we need so much. I think of the European immigration policy, which we need so much. In these areas so essential, the Union will break the paralysis. The new treaty, awarding the Eurogroup real power of decision lays the groundwork for future
economic governance of the euro area. 

[6-3]
In summary, I do not mean finding the right balance between "yes" and "no." I mean overcoming
contradictions. This synthesis, it is located in the vision of a Europe that provides the means to act and protect.

6-7
The synthesis between the "yes" and "no", it is located in Europe, where the euro will finally be put to the service of growth and the economy. We did not create the second currency in the world to be the only ones it does not serve. 

9-7
I mean you can not ask an economic government for the euro area, we can not ask that policy has the advantage of his say over the economy and money and do not to commit at the highest political level. 

10-2
I want to open all the debates, I want to ask all the questions I want to raise all the problems. I want to ask the question of the monetary dumpings, social dumpings, ecological dumpings.
How would you like that we continue like this? Our companies have to compete with countries who mock the environmental balance, who respect no social rights and who practice fiscal dumping. Who can tell me that this is the competition? This is disloyalty, not competition. 

10-4
I ask you for one minute attention. I'll tell you something serious. I ask the question of raising the value of the euro. Are we going to continue to manufacture aircraft on the European continent whereas whenever the euro appreciates by 10 cents, Airbus has a deficit of one billion? I do not accept this policy because, my friends, look at what the Americans are doing with the dollar, look at what the Chinese Yuan with, look at what the Japanese do with the Yen. I am simply saying that when the dollar loses 33% against the euro, how do you want our businesses to rediscover the productivity that they have lost, in an unfair manner, through the political management of other world currencies ? I voted for the euro, I believe in the euro. But, the currency is not a taboo subject. The currency, I want us to put in the service of growth, employment, your children, your job, full employment in Europe. I do not want there to be one subject that can only spoken of by bankers. 

10-7
I want to ask the question of the defense effort with regard to the Stability Pact. Of course France, Germany, Italy and Britain bear a considerable effort for protection but are we going to be able to continue for long to have four or five countries in Europe that ensure the safety of all other and respect the same rules on deficits while many others do not have the defense budgets that we have? 

