Vertaling Sark 30-8-2007

4-8
To explain that the Euro -  I take my responsibilities, I voted for Euro - did not raise prices, it is a mockery of the world because a number of our compatriots have seen that the indices not moved but prices rose.

14-3
If we are not able to provide Europe with an economic government.
If we are not able to put the Euro in the service of Europe's economy.
If we are not able to establish a true community preference.
If Europe is not able to recognize that competition is a means and not an end in itself and draw the consequences, then Europe will become the prey of predators around the world and the sin-offering of globalization that would only bring happiness to those who have no 'geloofsovertuiging'/ziel.

14-7
I was told: on the politics of the euro, France is isolated. They even had this unlikely idea that for a politician, talking about money was irresponsible. On what grounds? Who said that? Where is it written that you have the right to talk about everything in economics except money?

14-8
I was told that we should not talk about the value of the Euro because the European Central Bank is independent. It is precisely because it is independent it must accept the debate!

14-9
As if money was not a matter involving everyone. As if money was an issue that did not involve politics, which had no impact on people's lives, the growth on employment. And look what's happening. We made the second currency in the world and we are the only ones who are not served! Just ask the Americans what is the dollar to the power of the U.S. economy. Look into the crisis that we experienced what represented 0.5 point decrease in U.S. interest rates. Look at how the Japanese came out with zero interest rates and the yen that they maintain low. Should I talk about China, this giant of the world manages its currency with very carefully?

14-10
And we, we're going to say that the Euro is at its right level! No doubt, but the problem is that it is competing with other currencies, they are not at their right level. I know this is a very original idea and I am wrong to think aloud.

15-1
I believe in the independence of the ECB, I believe in the usefulness of the Euro, but I will never accept that such an important subject can not even be the subject of an exchange.

15-2
If we want Europe to live, one must not be afraid to say what we think, we should not be afraid of ideas, we should not be afraid of debate.

15-3
If we want Europe to once again become a growth area, we must accept to look at the world as it is and talk about it. It is necessary that we leave the dogmas behind us.
