SPEECH/ 09/557
José Manuel Dur ã o Barroso
P resident of the European Commission
Statement of President Barroso in the debate on the Preparation of the European Council
Figures and graphics available in PDF and WORD PROCESSED

http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-09-557_en.htm 

European Parliament
Strasbourg, 25 November 2009
Mr President,
Minister,
Honourable members,
We have on many occasions discussed the great opportunities offered by the Lisbon Treaty for the EU. So let me express once again my satisfaction that when we will meet each other next time, we will do so with the Lisbon Treaty already in force. And with the Treaty in force, it is time to move even more decisively beyond institutional discussions towards policies and results for citizens.
The appointments made last week naming Herman van Rompuy as President of the Council and Catherine Ashton as High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission, are the first steps towards the full implementation of the Lisbon Treaty. I know that both President van Rompuy and HR/VP Baroness Ashton are eager to start putting the Lisbon Treaty to work.

The designation of Herman van Rompuy was by consensus a decision by the Heads of State and Government and it is a decision I welcome and personally support very much. Herman van Rompuy has earned huge respect as Prime Minister of Belgium. He brings a combination of the instinctive Europeanism of Belgium and his own skills as consensus builder - exactly the two most precious qualities to have as President of the European Council. I look forward to working in tandem with him, and to joining him here in the plenary debates on the European Council. It is essential that while every Institution has to work within the respect of its own competences and that of other Institutions, we all work together for the common European good.
I am extremely proud and happy that Catherine Ashton has been designated as the first VP/HR. It is an appointment that I supported and approved during the European Council as it is necessary according to the Treaties. We all know her well as someone who has both the political skill and the sense of direction to take on the dema nding task of the first HR/VP.

As I said yesterday, all the nominations for the Commission have now been made. I am particularly happy that within one week, it was possible to triple the nominations of women, from 3 to 9. I want once again thank all of you that helped to achieve this result, not ideal, but reasonable. I will now move on to the portfolio allocations. It is my privilege to assure this House that I will do so in the full respect of the priorities defined in my political guidelines and the commitments made to the Parliament. Then the Parliament can hold hearings and vote on the next College in January. I hope there will be no further delays as our citizens expect action.
Next month's European Council gives us the first significant opportunity to show that we are focused on policy substance. To show that it will make a difference. I would like to concentrate on three key dossiers which will be under the spotlight.
First, climate change. A European Council a week before the conclusion of the Copenhagen summit is certainly well timed.

The EU has shown itself the pioneer of action on climate change. We have been the first to show that cap and trade works. We have been the first to put a binding, tough target for reduced emissions on the table. We have led the way in defining how the developed world can make a real contribution to financing the costs of climate change in developing countries.
But as the preparation of the Copenhagen Conference draws to its close, the pressure grows. We need to stay united and to keep focused on our goal of cutting global emissions, and getting the necessary finance on the table. That is our task. It is not only a task for Europe, but also for other major players to achieve.
What should be the key messages from the European Council?
First, that we want to see an ambitious and meaningful agreement in Copenhagen, that - first and foremost - enshrines the 2°C objective. This is essential. We can negotiate with each other, but we cannot negotiate against science. So we must set real and effective emission reduction targets for developed countries, as well as substantive actions from developing countries and fast growing developing countries. It must also be comprehensive, covering the full range of issues in the Bali roadmap.
Second, even if at Copenhagen it will not be possible to finalise a new Treaty, it must bring an operational agreement, based on real commitments on all sides, to which all the major players contribute and which is endorsed at the highest political level. We need a clear, simple, political text that shows that we are moving from talking about tackling climate change to doing something about it. And it should be explicit that this will be turned into a fully-fledged treaty as soon as possible.
The agreement should be precise. That means specific, individual numbers on reduction of emissions, and a detailed finance package to help developing countries both to develop mitigation programmes and to adapt to climate change. In particular, fast start funding is going to be very important.

Finally, I feel the leaders' involvement is going to be essential, as these are difficult decisions that need to be made at the highest levels of government. I am pleased to hear that following PM Rasmussen invitation already at least 65 or so Heads of State and Government are planning to attend Copenhagen, and will attend myself.
Another key area is the Stockholm Programme in the area of justice, liberty and security.
People want to live in a European Union that is prosperous and peaceful, where their rights are respected and their security protected. They want to be able to travel freely, and to move temporarily or permanently to another European country in order to study, to work, to found a family, to set up a business or to retire.
We have come a long way over the last ten years. The removal of controls at internal borders in the Schengen area allows more than 400 million citizens of 25 countries to travel without border control from the Iberian Peninsula to the Baltic States and from Greece to Finland.
Now the Lisbon Treaty gives us a new opportunity to move ahead. We all know that freedom, security and justice will see some of the most significant changes from the Treaty. It brings this area of policy fully within the scope of our normal procedures. It clarifies what action can be taken. And in particular, it extends the democratic framework for these policies by the full involvement of your Parliament.
The Stockholm Programme, which is largely based on Commission input and proposals, will be a key lever to make this happen. It should set the scene for a comprehensive, effective programme of action which brings real change and real benefits to our citizens.

5-1: The Programme as it emerges from the European Council needs to lay out the guiding priorities for justice and home affairs in the years to come, and to show how they will be put into practice. So more effective respect for fundamental rights; better access to the courts; more determined action against organised crime, human trafficking and terrorism; effective management of migration - these are all areas where the Stockholm Programme should set out a series of concrete steps forward. They also require a strong approach with our third country partners, which I am determined to pursue as we work together to maximise our global influence.

5-2: Finally, of course, we must continue to keep the focus on tackling the economic crisis. EU action has made a major contribution over the last year. Now we must keep that strength of purpose and sense of focus.
We must keep a close watch on our recovery measures, especially with unemployment still rising. Our top priority must remain keeping people in jobs and helping those who have lost their jobs to get back into work.
We must also start to shape a post-crisis agenda to exploit new sources of growth and find new job opportunities - the agenda we have sketched out in the 2020 consultation paper that the Commission has circulated yesterday. I very much look forward to hearing the thoughts of this Parliament and factoring your views into the final document.

6-1: The European Council will also face a test of ambition with progress on the financial supervision package. I know this goal is shared by this Parliament, and I urge you to work with the Council to allow final adoption by mid-2010, so that effective new Authorities can be in place by the end of 2010.
6-2: Climate change - freedom, security and justice - response to the economic and financial crisis: these are three areas which impact on citizens every day of their lives. And three areas where the European Council can show that the Lisbon Treaty has opened a new chapter in the history of the European project. In order to obtain meaningful results, we must work in partnership. In partnership between the Commission and the Parliament, to whom I am grateful for consistent support for the policy ambitions put forward by the Commission on these areas. In partnership with the Swedish Presidency and the Council, which I really congratulate for the hard work done. In partnership with our Danish friends preparing the Copenhagen conference. Let us make the most out of what lies ahead: let us work together for the common European good. The Commission, and I myself, are ready to take up the challenge. I am sure this Parliament, with reinforced powers under the new Treaty, will also show its sense of responsibility and its commitment to the Europe of Citizens.
Thank your for your attention.
7


