Transcript of press conference given by the Prime Minister David Cameron at the EU Summit in Brussels on 17 December 2010.
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/eu-summit-press-conference 

Good afternoon and welcome.  We came into this European Council with a victory for commonsense on the 2011 EU budget.  The European Parliament's request for a 6% budget increase was decisively rejected and agreement on a much more limited increase of 2.91% was secured.  This saves the British taxpayer several hundred million pounds compared with what could have happened if the normal processes were followed and the difference was just split between the Council and the Parliament, and I believe it was our intervention that stopped that from happening.
1-2: That left Britain with two priorities for this meeting.  First, because it's in Britain's interest that we have a strong and stable eurozone, it was important to establish a permanent mechanism for bailing out eurozone countries who find themselves in financial difficulties; and that has been achieved with the very limited treaty change that has now been agreed.  Now, this change does not affect the UK and it does not transfer any powers from Britain to the European Union.
1-3: Second, I said yesterday that we needed to make sure that Britain was not liable for bailing out the eurozone when the new permanent arrangements come into effect in 2013, and we have achieved that too.  It is clear in the Council Conclusions and in the draft legal Act annexed to them that this will be, and I quote, 'a stability mechanism for member states whose currency is the Euro'.  That is a mechanism established by eurozone countries for eurozone countries, so Britain will not be part of the new mechanism.
Crucially, we've also ensured that the current emergency arrangements are closed off when the new mechanism comes into effect in 2013.  On this point, the Conclusions are clear that the new mechanism will replace the emergency arrangements.  I wanted to be absolutely clear that Article 122, which was the basis on which the emergency arrangements were established, would not be used in this way once the new arrangements came in.  On this, both the Conclusions and the legal Act are crystal clear that, and I quote, 'Article 122 will no longer be needed for such purposes' and that, quote, 'heads of state and government therefore agreed that it should not be used for such purposes'.  I think that is pretty clear and it's not just in the Council Conclusions; it's in the Article that introduces the treaty change. 
2-2: So what Britain has secured in black and white is a clear and unanimous agreement that from 2013 Britain will not be dragged into bailing out the eurozone.  That couldn't be clearer.  It is, of course, frustrating that we will still be part of the emergency mechanism until 2013, but that is a commitment the previous British government entered into against our advice and we have to live with it.  But I've taken the very first opportunity I've had as Prime Minister to put this right and to protect Britain's interests, and this much improved package will now be put before the British parliament.
3-1: I also wanted to take the opportunity of this Council to keep up the momentum on the question of the future of the EU budget.  This is an issue I've discussed in the margins of this meeting with a number of other European leaders.  Tomorrow, Angela Merkel, Nicolas Sarkozy and I, together with a number of other partners, will publish a text setting out our goals.  This will cover both the budgets for 2012 and 2013, where we want to do even better than we did in 2011, and the longer term financial perspectives covering the rest of this decade.  What I'm doing together with our key partners in Europe is putting down a firm marker for these negotiations.  All around Europe countries are tightening their belts to deal with their deficits.  Europe cannot be immune from that.  We want to see real budgetary restraint from 2014 to 2020, the time of the next financial perspectives, and that's why the text we will publish talks about at least a real terms freeze in the budget for that period. 
3-2: My job is to advance British interests in Europe and I will always be totally committed to that.  It is in our interests that the eurozone achieves stability and that treaty change is a key part of that.  I've been able to save British taxpayers millions by the change we've made to the 2011 EU budget.  I've been able to protect Britain from having to bail out the eurozone from 2013.  These are always, and I will do so again in the long term, EU budget negotiations.  This will not be easy; the odds in these budget negotiations are always stacked against us.  It will be a long and hard campaign, but it's one in which I am determined to stand up for Britain's interests.


1


