Report on the European Council meeting held in Brussels on February 11, 2010 and measures in response to the evolution of the economic and employment situation
Plenary session of the Congreso de los Diputados [Lower House of Parliament], Madrid, Wednesday 17 February 2010
Mr. President, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen,
In 2009, the Spanish economy posted negative growth of 3.6% and in the last quarter, in QoQ terms, -0.1%. These are provisional figures from the National Statistics Institute (INE) which we have just received.
They are figures which are in line with the forecast we made in June. They are figures which confirm that the recession peaked in the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, and show that, since then, the situation has been worsening at a slower rate.
It is a trend that we would like to be more pronounced, but it is one which clearly points towards a recovery. As evidence I would remind you of the QoQ trend in 2009: -1.7% in the first quarter of 2009; -1% in the second; -0.3%, in the third and -0.1% in the fourth.
Today the breakdown of the Gross Domestic Product trend has just been published: while in the third quarter domestic demand dragged GDP by 6.6 points in terms of YoY growth, in the fourth quarter the figure improved to 5.3 points. Behind this lower negative contribution lies the growth in QoQ terms of both private consumption and capital goods. External demand continues to make a positive contribution to growth with exports growing for the third quarter running.
If we compare these growth figures to those of the Eurozone, we see that the Eurozone's yearly average (-4%) was more negative than ours by a few tenths of a percentage point.
1-3: It is true that the recovery of the Eurozone started in the third quarter, but the figures for the last three months, while yielding a Eurozone average of +0.1%, have once again shown signs that an economy of the importance of Germany's has stagnated and the Italian economy, one of the largest in Europe, has slipped back into recession, with a decline in GDP of -0.2%. In contrast, the French economy is showing greater dynamism. Therefore, and always in terms of Gross Domestic Product, the evolution of the crisis to date in Spain is not so different from that of the Eurozone as a whole. Where there is a very considerable difference is in the unemployment rate.
According to the latest Active Population Survey, our country's unemployment rate, which stood at 18.8% at the end of 2009, is approximately twice that of the European average. To put it in simple terms, this means that in the last two years 1,800,000 jobs have been lost.
The high temporary employment rate in our job market and the sharp downswing in the residential construction sector have taken our unemployment rate differential with the European average to a level close to that reached in previous crises.
Time and time again history repeats itself. To change this is everyone's responsibility: the political groups, the economic and social stakeholders, institutions and citizens, and, of course, in first place, it is the Government who must shoulder most of the responsibility for the decisions intended to correct, once and for all, this unfortunate anomaly.
Members of Parliament,
The Spanish economy has been improving during 2009 after a very sharp recession. This is something which is true and demonstrable. But, in a way which is much more apparent to our citizens, equally true is the fact that for a year and a half we have been seeing the loss of employment, a great deal of employment, and that, even if the improvement is consolidated, we will still be seeing the loss of employment in our country for some months to come.
2-2: I would like to reiterate what I have maintained in my previous speeches regarding the crisis, and there have been a lot of them; in the Government's opinion we cannot speak of true recovery until we start creating net employment once again. To do that, first we need to grow again. With the figures currently available to us, and with the caution born of experience, I can say that the Government expects our economy to grow again in the first half-year of this year, and that we will begin to create net employment at the end of this period.
The creation of employment is always in our minds and is behind every measure that we take. It is the horizon of every action we deploy. This obsession is not even mitigated by the fact that, with the same determination, we strive to protect those who have lost their job. In pursuing this commitment, the Government is only acting as a vehicle for the sense and duty of solidarity which Spanish society must recognise in itself.
Solidarity is evidence of our collective ethic and we should congratulate ourselves on being able to demonstrate solidarity and keep our commitment to it. But the Government knows that what the country really needs, in order to regain confidence, is to have enough employment for everyone to organise their own life in a state of security. This is our principal goal.
2-5: However, the situation in which we find ourselves now is particularly difficult because, although we are on the verge of recovery, before our eyes we have all the damage wrought by the crisis in strictly economic terms, and also in social and political terms.
And, in this regard, ladies and gentlemen, along with unemployment, the other most negative aspect of the Spanish economy is the public deficit. The public deficit in 2009 rose to 11.4% of GDP, two points higher than was forecast. The causes of this high figure are obvious. One cause is the extraordinary and deliberate public investment effort we have made to contain the recession. The second is the no less extraordinary and deliberate effort made in the area of social expenditure to preserve cohesion. The third is the greater than expected drop in revenues.
While the causes may vary, the conclusion is the same: we cannot maintain such a high public deficit. The consequences will be serious for the present and even more so for the future.
3-1: I would like to remind you, ladies and gentlemen, that, before knowing this figure, the Government's Sustainable Economy Strategy, which I presented to this House on 2 December, already included an Austerity Plan which developed the action lines set out in the Budget for 2010, and which would provide effective countermeasures against the rising public deficit. That is what the Government has done, setting 2013 as the horizon year, which is when we, along with the great majority of European countries which have taken on this commitment  - twenty of the twenty-seven which have excessively high public deficits - will have to return to a deficit of 3%. So as not to delay the start of this process, we have included an additional reduction for this year in order to offset the extra [budget] deviation in 2009, amounting, as you are aware, to five thousand million euros.
I will say this clearly: our country is in a position to make the necessary efforts to control the public deficit. We have the margin to do it and the will to do it. The Government's commitment and determination in regard to fiscal consolidation is total. It is the same determination and the same commitment which enabled us to keep our public accounts in surplus for three years running for the first time ever in our country.
3-3: The exceptional and conjunctural deficit which we are now facing must be put in the context of our level of public debt. Spain's public debt was 54.3% of our Gross Domestic Product in 2009, over twenty points lower than the European average, a difference in our favour which is going to be maintained in the coming years. The cost of servicing this debt is less than 2% of Gross Domestic Product, when the Eurozone average is 3%. Only 21% of the Treasury's total portfolio matures in 2010 and scarcely 30% of our debt is in foreign hands. The cost of ten-year debt is 4%, lower, for example, than the same figure at the beginning of 2004, in a situation which was much less complicated for our public accounts.
3-4: I believe, ladies and gentlemen, that it is essential that we all share this analysis. Share in the [belief in] Spain's solvency and help promote confidence in Spain by recognising the good health of our public debt. This is necessary because right now it is where not only credibility in the sustainability of our public accounts in the medium term lies, but also how our economy as a whole and our companies are perceived abroad and in international markets. And it is particularly necessary when there are speculative movements which could alter the stability of the Eurozone as a whole and which impact on each of its countries.
3-5: Just two weeks ago we again experienced moments of panic in the financial markets; debt spreads widened and the Spanish Stock market lost as much as 6% in a single day. But we need to put things in perspective and take a broader view when analysing these phenomena. We should remember that our Stock Market has gained nearly 10% since the beginning of 2009, a similar figure to those posted by other European Stock Market indexes.
3-6: These are times which underline more than ever the urgent need to strengthen economic governance and the coordination of the economic policies within the European Union, as evidenced in the recent Informal Council of 11 February which addressed the situation of Greece and yesterday in the first measures adopted by ECOFIN in that respect.
Ladies and gentlemen, Members of Parliament,
3-7: On 2 December, I presented the Sustainable Economy Strategy, the Government's integrated plan to drive and consolidate economic recovery and help overhaul our productive model. It is the latest result of a complex and ongoing process of reflection and decision-making. In the difficult scenario of the last eighteen months, the Government has acted decisively, taking the measures that were understood to be the most appropriate for each phase of the crisis: first, the support of the financial sector; then, at the worst moment of the crisis when this began to impact on the real economy, the set of actions designed to soften the blow, to contain the impact of the recession as far as was possible, to promote activity, and maintain what employment we could, all the while preserving social cohesion. These were the measures which formed part of the Economy and Employment Stimulus Plan, known as Plan E, and now it is time to concentrate on supporting the [economic] recovery with an ambitious reform process which will speed up the overhaul of our productive model and foster job creation.
The most important initiatives and commitments of the Sustainable Economy Strategy are those concerning the Sustainable Economy Act, the approval of the Austerity Plan, the call for social dialogue to address labour reforms, and the Social Security reform proposals sent to the Toledo Pact Commission.
First of all, the Sustainable Economy Act. We have submitted the text of the first Draft Bill for public consultation and have received contributions from over twenty agents and institutions, including social stakeholders, the main regulatory bodies, and advisory and consultation boards. We have analysed the proposals received in a spirit of integration, introducing improvements that clarify or adjust the initiatives proposed initially. Now, as soon as the Council of State issues its opinion, we will shortly be delivering the Bill to this House for debate and approval.
The Government intends to continue to use this parliamentary channel to introduce any new proposals and suggestions put forward by the various parliamentary groups, without delaying the entry into force of the Act.
I also promised that the Government would present an Austerity Plan aimed at fiscal consolidation.
I would underline that this is the ideal time to put it in practice. If we had done it before the reduction of current expenditure set in the Budget, it would have had a very negative effect on the Spanish economy, which has, for the last two years, required the aid of the public sector to offset the difficulties of the private sector. But it would have been just as negative to push the plan back a few years, since any prolonged growth in the deficit would have dragged economic recovery in the medium term.
It is therefore logical that, while we are on the verge of recovery, the priority should be to find a way to return to budgetary equilibrium as soon as possible.
This plan, which will last for four years, 2010-2013, involves a budgetary adjustment amounting to 5.7% of Gross Domestic Product, equivalent to more than fifty thousand million euros. The Austerity Plan already includes an additional reduction for 2010 of five thousand million euros, affecting all Ministries, without exception, in accordance with the distribution agreed in the last Council of Ministers.
In these four years to come, the adjustments will affect all items on the budget with the exception of social services, research, development and innovation, sustainable economy funds, and development cooperation funds.
In the medium term, we are aiming for personnel costs to fall by 4% in this period. This will require a wage freeze policy, combined with a reduction in the number of public employees, which for this year will already amount to a reduction in public employment replacement of 10%. Operating expenses will be reduced by 15% compared with current levels.
Transfers and subsidies will receive the most significant cuts, equivalent to 1.6% of  GDP, and less urgent investments will also have to be postponed, resulting in a reduction, albeit smaller than any of the other items, of half a percentage point of Gross Domestic Product.
Nevertheless, I made a commitment to the House that the level of public investment in Spain would remain above the European Union average, as has been the case, year after year, under this Government.
The Austerity Plan calls for a framework agreement proposal with the Autonomous Regions and local institutions, to be brought within the framework of the Fiscal and Financial Policy Council and the National Commission for Local Administration. These bodies must work towards the reduction of the public deficit.
Without their loyal collaboration it will not only be impossible to achieve austerity but, if it were possible, it would be unfair since they account for 50% of State expenditure.
In addition to the cuts in expenditure mentioned above, the Budget for 2010 includes, as you are aware, a moderate tax rise equivalent to 1% of the Gross Domestic Product. In spite of this, tax pressure in 2013 will be 34%, practically the same, perhaps even a little less than the pressure that existed when I became President of the Government in 2004, and still one of the lowest in Europe.
Finally, this Austerity Plan will be complemented by two immediate actions which also form part of the strategy: a plan against tax and employment fraud and the black economy, and a structural rationalisation plan for the General State Administration and the public business sector. The former will be published in a fortnight's time; the latter in the next two months.
I repeat that fiscal consolidation is a priority goal for the Government, so in the future we will take all necessary measures to correct any deviation from the planned budgetary adjustment.
Members of Parliament,
When I presented the strategy, I also promised to pass on to social stakeholders a number of action lines with a view to introducing changes in our employment institutions: changes that will help us to adapt to the new productive model we are promoting; changes that will help take advantage of the recovery to create more employment and to create it fast, and changes that, in the process, will not breach workers' rights. And that is what we have done.
The document presented by the Government is based on the premise that the principal dysfunction of our job market is its two-tier nature; i.e. it operates with a high level of temporary employment and an excessive rate of employment instability. The high employment turnover is not only unjust but it is also inefficient and discourages investment in training and human resources and the adoption of state-of-the-art technologies, thereby slowing down improvements in productivity. Consequently we propose effecting a combined, balanced and consistent action on both sides of the equation: to reduce the amount of temporary contracts and encourage the use of indefinite term contracts.
Secondly, the document addresses the challenge of encouraging part-time work to align it with the European average. We also need to strike a balance between flexibility and conciliation, so that it will be an attractive formula for both workers and employers.
Thirdly, the Government believes it is essential to provide young people with more job opportunities, especially those with fewer qualifications. To do this we propose a Special Programme to promote recruitment and the performance of a special training programme in conjunction with the Autonomous Regions.
In fourth place, we address the matter of how job placement agencies work and how to make the job market more dynamic. In this respect, we propose strengthening public employment services, making them more efficient and encouraging the use of private agents in the placement and relocation of the unemployed.
In fifth place, we suggest a review of current employment incentives, with a view to making them more effective.
New measures are also proposed in respect of gender equality, pursuant to the 2007 Equality Act, the fight against work absenteeism, and the "German model" intended to promote the use of reduction of the working day as a way of temporarily reducing employment rather than destroying it.
The discussion process of this ambitious labour market reform is already underway and has been favourably accepted by social stakeholders, who have been previously motivated by the bilateral agreement reached with regard to collective bargaining in 2010. I expect the same success in the tripartite social dialogue phase; I trust in everyone's generosity, and I promise that the Government will come to the table with the best of intentions, and I augur benefits for our country as a whole if the process concludes with a comprehensive agreement as quickly as possible. All of us, I stress all of us, will have the opportunity to congratulate ourselves upon it.
Along with the employment measures we have the Toledo Pact. The Government has approved and sent to the Toledo Pact Commission a document with its proposals for its overhaul. This has been done under a mandate issued by the Commission itself, which asked the Government for a report on the state of the Spanish Social Security system and for the action lines which, in its opinion, were necessary to ensure the stability and solvency of that system.
When formulating its proposal, the Government has taken three criteria into account: firstly, the experience gained over these years to ensure the stability of our pension system in the short and medium term; secondly, the commitments acquired under the agreement on measures to be taken regarding the Social Security, entered into between the Government and social stakeholders on 2 June 2006; and, thirdly, the need to address in a timely manner and via a gradual process the most important challenge facing our Social Security: the aging of our population, caused by the spectacular increase in life expectancy beyond the age of 65.
Like all proposals, ladies and gentlemen, this reflects the position of the Government, and now, in accordance with established procedures and the precedent set by previous reforms, it is the turn of the Toledo Pact Commission of this House to hear out the social stakeholders, evaluate the set of proposals and reports it has received, and decide accordingly what recommendations to put before Congreso [Lower House of Parliament] and to the Government. And, of course, all in the quest for a great agreement, a great pact, which will underpin the soundness of the original Toledo Pact.
I will now move on to make a more rapid review of some other initiatives adopted in recent weeks as part of the Sustainable Economy Strategy, which I explained to this House on 2 December.
The Spanish financial system has demonstrated its strength and soundness to face up to the challenges posed by the financial crisis. But it is also true that, as has happened in other developed countries, credit is still not flowing normally. We need to have a financial system capable of playing its intermediation role, meeting the needs of small- and medium-sized enterprises and the self-employed, who are finding it most difficult to obtain financing.
The Official Credit Institute, the ICO, is making an exceptional effort in this respect and, with a view to being even more effective, and as we had promised, on 21 December the Council of Ministers reviewed ICO's credit facilities, consolidating existing ones and putting in place the Financial Facilitator initiative.
Thus, in January, ICO 2010 has already granted its first eleven thousand loans and expects to lend twenty-three thousand million euros in 2010 to foster the investment and liquidity of SMEs and the self-employed.
The financial system also needs to adjust to today's volume and type of activity which reflects the lesser importance of the real estate sector in our productive system. The Government approved the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB) which, having received authorisation from the European Commission, is now in a position to complete its restructuring task.
Approximately 40% of Spain's Savings Banks are currently involved in restructuring processes or are strengthening their equity under the supervision of the Bank of Spain. I would like to call for the utmost diligence and collaboration of the governing bodies of the Savings banks, and of the Autonomous Regions which oversee them, so that these processes can be completed in the first half-year of 2010. The Government is monitoring the situation closely and will do whatever is necessary to achieve this goal.
With regard to the modernisation of the judicial system, as we had promised, on 8 January the Bill to reform the Civil Registry was presented, in order to enable citizens, enterprises and government bodies to access it online.
On the subject of the reduction of administrative posts, on 15 January and 12 February two important rafts of regulatory reforms were approved in implementation of the Services Directive.
The lines of the new airport model, presented to Congreso [Lower House of Parliament] by the Ministry of Development on 11 January, have also been defined. This will allow private capital and the Autonomous Regions, Chambers of Commerce and Local Councils to participate in the overall management of airports with the highest volume of traffic. Another structural reform.
In the area of industrial policy we have been focusing our efforts on the automotive sector and on other sectors strategic to our industry. In 2009, the Government has invested close to 3,100 million euros in the Automotive Sector Competitiveness Plan, helping to obtain commitments from manufacturers to develop their new models in Spain and, therefore, to help maintain this important manufacturing activity in our country. And we are currently promoting the development of electric vehicles, working alongside the main energy, automotive and technological enterprises and associations in the development of the Integrated Electric Vehicle Plan which will be presented on 6 April.
This is an example of a number of strategic sectors to which the Government is paying special attention, which also include Information and Communication Technologies, biotechnology, health technologies, renewable energies, and the aerospace sector.
In this respect the Government, as we had promised, is already working on the Integrated Industrial Policy Plan 2010-2020, part of the Sustainable Economy Strategy. In order to ensure its effectiveness and viability, in March the Government will set up an Interministerial Commission on Industrial Policy, which will include the participation of social stakeholders and will present a diagnosis of the situation of the sector and its main challenges in the coming years.
With regard to environmental sustainability, as promised we approved on 11 December an Energy Saving Plan affecting 330 buildings belonging to the General State Administration. This is a first step towards the promotion of energy service companies which could help create nearly fifty thousand direct and indirect jobs.
On 23 December, an amendment to nuclear legislation was passed, as we had promised, establishing criteria and additional requirements with regard to the possibility of extending the useful life of nuclear power plants beyond their forty-year design life, which will increase the plants' civil liability coverage and, in accordance with Parliament's unanimous mandate, set in motion the procedure for setting up the centralised storage of nuclear waste.
Furthermore, on 22 January we approved the new emission trading rights scheme with the purpose of meeting our obligation to reduce emissions by the 2020 horizon year at the lowest possible cost.
Members of Parliament,
The Government plans to continue to implement in a timely manner all the reforms set out in the Sustainable Economy Strategy. As in my previous speech before this House, I once again announce the following initiatives:
* On February 19 we will present the Mediation and Arbitration Act.
* On February 26, the Social Inclusion Promotion Plan and the Marine Environment Protection Act.
* On March 5 we will pass the Plan to Combat Fraud and the Black Economy.
* On March 12, the Science, Technology and Innovation Act.
* On March 18 the Interministerial Committee for Industrial Policy will be approved and the goals defined for horizon year 2020.
* On March 31 the Plan for the Rationalisation and Reduction of the General State Administration and of the Public Business Sector will be approved.
This ambitious raft of reforms will lend stability and give a horizon to Spanish economic sectors which are starting to recover this year.
Besides this, ladies and gentlemen, we must continue to stimulate activity directly, leveraging the recovery.
Here, I should remind you of the efforts made in the 2010 Budget to maintain the already very high current levels of public investment in infrastructure, research, development and innovation, and education. This latter area is one where I hope that the awaited State Pact led by the Ministry of Education will come to fruition as soon as possible.
Although the Ministry of Public Works has been subject to a reduction of 1,760 million euros as a result of the Austerity Plan, the total investment of the Public Works Group in 2010 will remain at levels similar to those of 2008 and 2009, when investment amounted to over seventeen thousand million euros.  Moreover, thanks to the implementation of the public and private Investment Plan, there will be considerable investment in infrastructure in the coming years.
In 2010, eight thousand million euros will go to fomenting R&D+I policies. To put this in perspective, this is three times the 2,900 million which went to R&D+I in Spain in 2004.
I should also remind the House of the two Sustainable Economy Funds.
In respect of the State Fund for Employment and Local Sustainability, to which five thousand million euros was assigned,  Local Councils have presented 30,620 investment projects, which will help maintain or create 274,000 direct jobs. The most notable projects are related to energy saving and efficiency, the management of water resources, human capital, fostering innovative activities and Information and Communication Technologies, and e-Government.
In addition, through the Sustainable Economy Fund, the State has made considerable financial resources available to private initiative to facilitate and boost investment in 2010 and 2011 in the amount of twenty thousand million euros.  The ICO will provide fifty per cent of the financing - ten thousand million in the two years - while financial institutions will provide the other fifty per cent.
The instruments of the Sustainable Economy Fund are now fully available to companies and the self-employed.
Lastly, ladies and gentlemen, the Government has increased the funding aimed at stimulating employment. In 2010, 7,800 million euros will go to active employment policies. The amount earmarked for this item has been increasing every year and is now at record levels. Of this amount, 2,850 million euros will go to fostering and subsidising new hirings and the creation of stable jobs; 77 million to special schemes in certain Autonomous Regions, such as the Canary Islands, Extremadura and Castile-La Mancha; 40 million euros will continue to go to increasing employment in the sectors of production most affected by globalisation, and over 200 million to employment generation schemes in the agricultural sector.
Ladies and gentlemen, Members of Parliament,
Since the start of the crisis, as head of the Government, I have tried to accomplish our project through dialogue: dialogue in the social arena, in the political arena and with the institutions.  I have made this my aim, I have always tried to do it, and I have reiterated it every time I have spoken in this House.
More especially, I believe that it is necessary to implement the above mentioned reforms and that this should be done with the greatest consensus possible, and I am aware that the Government is responsible for both these aims.
The reforms which the Government considers to be the most necessary to drive and ensure the sustainable recovery of the Spanish economy are under way.
Because of the radical nature of these reforms they are not restricted to one legislature and affect the very foundations of our productive model.
The Government has done as much as possible to re-establish the climate of social dialogue which proved so fruitful in the past.
The Toledo Pact Commission has its own dialogue process with regard to future reforms to our Social Security system. The Government has met its obligations and responsibilities by presenting its proposals and is now fully prepared to consider proposals from others in respect of the future of the pensions system.
The dialogue regarding the Education Pact, which we started some months ago with the leading opposition party, continues its course, although we would like to see a positive result as soon as possible.
Consequently, three specific processes for consensus are already under way: the Toledo Pact, labour reform in the area of social dialogue, and the Education Pact.
The Government has promoted them, supports them and undertakes to abide by and apply the agreements; but we want more. Spanish society wants more.
To date, the Government and the Group behind it have sought the greatest support for each of the main anti-crisis measures presented to this Parliament. The support received in this House for the anti-crisis measures has always been sufficient; even more than sufficient, very great in some cases and for some major issues.
But it is not enough. In political and social terms, in a complicated situation such as the one we are currently experiencing, one which is decisive for the future of Spain, these one-off agreements are not sufficient. We need to make the agreements more extensive and increase consensus on the raft of reforms we need to approve and apply, and on the efforts which have to be made to do this. The Government appeals for this and offers this. To all the Groups in this House, with the best of intentions, we make an appeal for and offer consensus. 
Here I would like to put forward a proposal aimed at achieving the maximum consensus possible in fighting the economic crisis. I am going to appoint a Commission, headed by the Vice-president for Economic Affairs and including the Minister of Public Works and the Minister of Industry, Tourism and Commerce, who are the members of Government who are most directly involved in the reforms and will be the ones responsible for initiating dialogue and negotiation with the different groups represented in the House. We are going to make this Commission our top priority.  I am going to make this Commission my top priority, and I delegate responsibility for it to the people I have just mentioned.  We are going to do our utmost to reach agreements.

Points for the agreement. The Government believes that agreement should be reached on four points:
* Measures to improve the competitiveness of the Spanish economy and promote job creation.
* Industrial policy to drive the overhaul of the productive model.
* Fulfilment of the fiscal consolidation plan to reduce public deficit.
* Financial system: stability, access to credit by companies, and default.
With regard to the above points, we are committed to the initiatives contained in the Strategy and the Sustainable Economy Act. However, obviously, and this is our offer of dialogue and agreement, we are prepared to address other issues or consider other approaches regarding the proposed issue, and this debate is a good opportunity to do so.
The reforms, ladies and gentlemen, cannot be delayed. The Government will be calling on all the political parties to join in this dialogue as soon as possible, but the process cannot go on indefinitely. As I have said, the process cannot go on indefinitely, especially if the reforms are to be of maximum effectiveness, as is the Government's intention. 
The passage of the Sustainable Economy Bill, whether by agreeing on the issues contained in it or opening it up to other issues, establishes a parliamentary framework and a time frame for the legislative process which, in the Government's opinion, should mean completing the dialogue and the agreements within a period of no more than two months.
Obviously, this will involve some very hard work on the part of the Government and all the political groups in the House.
The Government's firm intention is that all the major reforms, those which follow a specific course, such as the Toledo Pact, social dialogue and the Education Pact, and those which we wish to subject to dialogue and general consensus, the ones I have put forward in the four points above, should be implemented before the end of the first half of the year.
It is a challenge. It is a challenge for everyone, and it represents a meaningful way to respond to what is today a demand from our citizens. It means, ladies and gentlemen, overcoming distrust, reconciling legitimate ambitions, accepting partial solutions, and making the best of our capabilities.
When we call for a collective effort, and appeal for and offer this will to reach a consensus, the Government is not renouncing its powers or abandoning its responsibilities. I repeat, ladies and gentlemen, to call for a collective effort and appeal for and offer a sincere will to reach an agreement does not mean we are renouncing either our authority or our duty. Rather it is an attempt to focus all our efforts on working towards economic recovery, in particular job creation, and the confirmation of what is best in our country.
Thank you very much.

