Speech by the President of the Government at the Plenary Session of the Lower House of Parliament on the Conclusions of the European Council and on the Government's economic policy
Lower House of Parliament, Madrid, Wednesday 11 July 2012

http://www.lamoncloa.gob.es/lang/en/presidente/intervenciones/Paginas/2012/20120711_PdG_LowerHouseParliament.aspx 
Honourable members,
Before I turn to the matter of the European Council which concerns us today, allow me to express my thanks for all the support which the Government has received from the Parliamentary Groups in this House, in particular from the main opposition party, before embarking on my trip to Brussels. I believe that such support gives strength to our positions and helps us to maintain them with greater robustness. I will not conceal from you of the fact that many of the positions seen in the European Council are the result of the weak political support which some leaders suffer. It is clear that we are faced with a task which is incumbent on all of us, and it is helpful to be able to offer our partners an image of unit which underpins our credit and the defence of our interests.
I call for your understanding regarding a report which may prove lengthy, but which is inevitable if I am to truthfully reflect the events at the Summit. Many resolutions were passed, many matters are worthy of attention, as is also the case regarding the account I wish to give you of the situation in Spain. I trust that the interest which you all share will compensate for the length of my address.
1-3; Prior to a detailed explanation of the events at the European Council on 28 and 29 June, allow me, Honourable Members, to dedicate a few moments to the apparent paradox observed in the reactions which its results aroused, and the complete turnaround which occurred one week later; whilst immediately after the Summit the stock markets rose and the risk premium fell because of the confidence expressed, over recent days the markets had only, for example, to realise that the mechanisms regarding debt purchases on the secondary market were not immediate in order for the exchanges and the risk premium once again to sound the alarm bells. In other words, Honourable Members, the political agreements reached at the Summit demand swift and full enactment in order for the markets to react favourably. The shortcomings in the governance of the European Union reveal their most dramatic face in situations such as this.
1-4; I would remind the Honourable Members that the recapitalisation of the Spanish banks requires unanimous approval of the Memorandum of Understanding by the Eurogroup and of the Assistance Agreement by the Council of Directors of the European Facility in order to take effect. For this to happen, six countries (Germany, Finland, Estonia, Slovenia, Italy and Malta) require parliamentary approval. In a further seven States, there must be a parliamentary information procedure. I need hardly stress that this will delay the process of implementing the agreements. The situation is the same, as we have seen today, in the case of Germany, where the Constitutional Court will lead to a delay regarding the new European Stability Mechanism.
Honourable Members,
Time, both in politics and in economics, is always an important variable, but at a moment of uncertainty in the markets and doubt as to Monetary Union, it becomes a critical variable. Hence the importance of all aspects which will help not only dispel the current uncertainties, but also clear the way for decisions to be taken. The aim is to ensure that between the political decision and its application, there is no time lag which could ultimately undermine the purpose of political agreement at the highest level.
2-2: Let us, then, following these brief and, in my opinion, important comments, move on to the events at the Summit of the Heads of State and of Government held on 28 and 29 June. As you are all aware, the European Council in June was staged at a particularly critical moment for the Euro, for the entire European project of integration, and also for Spain. The financial turbulence we are experiencing and the uncertainty this generates impede the growth of all European countries, and in particular that of Spain and our immediate neighbours. Doubts potentially raised by the single currency are translated into particularly stifling pressures on those economies which are right now the weakest. These pressures are reflected in extremely high and volatile risk premiums for the countries of the periphery. We must remember that Spain is in an especially weak position because of its excessive levels of debt and the serious recession we are going through, which we can only overcome by making progress in the intense process of correcting the deficit and implementing structural reforms, as this Government is doing.
This European Council was therefore particularly important because it represents a decisive change in a series of key aspects and sets a number of objectives for all, and for the benefit of all. An agreement was reached as to the need to correct the weaknesses of our Community structure. Much work still has to be done, but we are in agreement as to the path and the goal to be pursued. We have opened the door to a new model of European Union. Only time will reveal the importance of these decisions which, as is vital, were reached unanimously.
I stress this fact because I have noted a tendency to draw up lists of winners and losers, as if the meeting had been staged in the atmosphere of a sporting contest. Anyone familiar with the way in which these Summits are run knows this is not the case. On this occasion, as is usual, agreements were reached, I reiterate, by consensus, and were signed by all the Member States, being equally binding on all of us. Of course, there are common interests to discuss and national interests which each State staunchly champions, without losing sight of the fact that our overriding duty is to underpin the interests which we all share regarding the Union and its currency.
Seldom has it been so evident that it would prove impossible, over the course of two days and amid a situation of huge instability, to reach a successful conclusion at such an ambitious Summit as this was without the support of many hours of prior effort, numerous telephone conversations, a substantial exchange of ideas and proposals, hard work in the shadows and considerable agreement on the surface. In short, a world removed from the score in a sporting fixture.
2-6: The resolutions adopted may be summarised in two regards: First, it is vital to comply with budgetary agreements and structural reforms at a national level. Second, we must move towards greater integration within the European Union. This is particularly important, since a stronger common project helps, more than anything else, to restore confidence in the Euro and in its irreversibility.
3-1: I again stress that much remains to be done, but this Council did agree a number of elements which illustrate the determination of the Heads of State and of Government of the Eurozone, and of the European Union as a whole, to lend solidity to the project of integration, through a commitment to the single currency and to the single market. This will need to go hand-in-hand with other efforts to guarantee stable and sustainable growth which will create jobs in Europe. And so we also spoke at this European Council of the limited flexibility of our economies, the lack of competitiveness, insufficient funding, the lack of integrated markets within Europe, poor fiscal discipline and the need to deploy all mechanisms necessary in order to address these failings.
3-2: In summary, Honourable Members, the European Council, in order to overcome the current crisis, established the need for all - Member States and institutions - to work with an agenda based on five pillars, with which you are already familiar, as they share the same structure as my Government's own agenda. In other words: -fiscal consolidation -structural reforms at a national level -structural reforms and market integration across the Union -financial stability -and, fifthly and lastly, what we might call "more Europe".Only through simultaneous and consistent action on all fronts will we once again achieve sustainable growth and restore the stability of the European project.
Allow me, then, to now address each of these five building blocks, the response drawn up at this Council, and the steps to be taken in the immediate future, both by the Community and by each Member State, and in particular by Spain.
3-4: I will begin with the last of them, namely the need to strengthen the structure of the Union, or to put it another way, to construct more Europe.The first pillar: more Europe. Today, as some of us have indicated on numerous occasions, the Eurozone has an incomplete architecture which has resulted in some of the problems we are now experiencing and the difficulty in finding solutions to them. The Heads of State and of Government therefore intensely debated the report "Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union" drawn up by Mr Van Rompuy, President of the European Council, in partnership with the Presidents of the Commission, of the Eurogroup and of the European Central Bank. This report raises the need to achieve further integration in four fields: financial, fiscal, economic and political.
First, the most immediate matter, financial integration. This means transferring responsibility for supervision to the European level, establishing European mechanisms to guarantee deposits and for the restructuring and resolution of banking institutions. This system would be based on a single rulebook, in other words, regulatory and supervisory standards.
Progress in this field could, in my opinion, be swifter. Those of us belonging to the Euro wish to have a single supervisory system in place by the end of the year. This could be achieved by transferring certain supervisory capacities to the European Central Bank, in accordance with the terms of Article 127.6 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
4-3: Second, fiscal integration. This involves underpinning mechanisms for coordination, joint decision-making and implementation of fiscal policy. The compensation for giving up sovereignty would, if so agreed, be the introduction of "joint and several sovereign liabilities", in the words employed in Mr Van Rompuy's report. In the long term, a European Treasury would be established, with its own budget, and a European Debt Agency. Progress towards such increased integration will necessarily be gradual, but decisive.
4-4: My Government firmly supports this approach. A process similar to Maastricht will need to begin, plotting the course for the Union's future and rewarding those countries which are to form a part of the new fiscal union. Such increased fiscal integration will prove an effective instrument in compensating for the asymmetrical effects of economic crises on the different countries. Compensating for these effects, as occurs now through the isolated actions of national Governments, leads to major economic distortions, the consequences of which are ultimately more serious than the turbulence they are intended to alleviate.
4-5: Third, greater economic integration. Cooperation among Member States in devising and implementing their economic policies must be further strengthened in order to make them more consistent. These measures would be based on the existing procedures of the European Semester and the Euro-Plus Pact.
And fourth, greater political integration. As we share national competencies, we must also implement a process to provide European institutions with greater democratic support. This means making more extensive use of mechanisms for collaboration with the European Parliament and with national Parliaments.
4-7: Those countries belonging to the Euro, as reflected in the Conclusions of the Council, have declared their willingness to achieve greater integration in these fields. It is true that there are still differing shades of opinion and perspective, but much progress has been made, and in the right direction. As a result, the European Council invited its President to draw up a detailed working programme with a specific calendar to achieve genuine Economic and Monetary Union. The Member States and the European Parliament will be consulted with a view to submitting an initial report in October 2012, and a definitive text by the end of the year.
4-8: Spain has debated these issues at length with other Member States, along with the European institutions, and we will continue to play an active role in discussions. My position is unequivocal in this regard; we must be ambitious and, as soon as possible, draw up a roadmap allowing us to complement monetary union through fiscal union and a banking union. The solution must be comprehensive and must be implemented at the earliest possible opportunity.
5-1: The second pillar: guaranteeing financial stability. Allow me now to address this second aspect: guaranteeing, I would stress, financial stability. This, as acknowledged in the declarations of the European Council itself, is a prerequisite for growth. Only within a context of market stability is it possible to obtain the finance required in order to grow. The situation today is far from stable, and the current uncertainty is undermining prospects for growth and recovery. The European Council, and in particular the countries of the Eurozone, as part of their commitment to the single currency and the European project of integration, have demonstrated their commitment, and here I quote, to take "resolute action to address financial market tensions, restore confidence and revive growth". In this regard, the countries of the Eurozone have committed to the implementation of stabilisation measures to normalise the conditions for access to finance and liquidity which our economy and others need. In specific terms, it has been agreed that measures must be adopted on three fronts:
5-2: The first with regard to direct bank recapitalisation. The members of the Euro have agreed that the European Stability Mechanism, the ESM, will be able to grant loans directly to those banking institutions which so require, without the need for the resources to be channelled via a State, once a single banking supervision mechanism has been established. We have also set a date for the European Council to examine these proposals through its urgent procedures: the end of 2012. This is, in my opinion, a very important achievement. During this crisis the link of contagion between sovereign debt and the banks has proved particularly pernicious. Doubts as to the solvency of some banks have undermined the perceived soundness of various sovereign States, along with their ability to access the market. And vice versa. It was vital that this link be broken. Such assistance will be accompanied by financial and/or individual conditionality, depending on the State's regulations for assistance. Only if the scale of the problem in the financial sector is too large with regard to the size of its economy will it be possible to impose more general conditionality. We have in this regard agreed to review the exceptional situation of Ireland.
5-3: Second, the Member States of the Eurozone have reiterated their support for Spain, along with the need to conclude all the steps required to release aid for our financial system as soon as possible. As you know, this aid will initially be provided by the European Financial Stability Facility, until the ESM becomes operational. Last Monday, just last Monday, the Eurogroup set out the conditions for the loan, with terms, interest rates, disbursements and grace periods which, in the judgement of the Government, are satisfactory and appropriate for the intended purpose. The criteria of conditionality which, as the Honourable Members are aware and as I wish to remind them, solely affect those financial institutions receiving the loan and their process of restructuring, were likewise definitively settled. At the Summit we also agreed that when this support is transferred from the Facility to the Mechanism, this will be performed without prejudice to the State's private creditors, as the ESM will not enjoy any senior creditor status. This will give greater security to those who trust in our sovereign debt. What is more, as soon as the possibility of direct recapitalisation is introduced, the financial support for Spain will no longer be Spanish public debt, but will instead be managed by the single supervisor.
6-1: And third, another very important aspect, the Member States of the Euro agreed to use all the tools available to us to guarantee the financial stability of the Eurozone. This includes, in particular, using the instruments available within the European firewall in a flexible and efficient manner to stabilise the markets, with the sole requirement that obligations derived from the European Semester, the Stability and Growth Pact and the Excessive Deficit Procedure be respected. The purchasing of debt on primary and secondary markets in order to make them more stable has been substantially facilitated. In particular, now that the European Central Bank has agreed to act as the agent for the existing mechanisms in order to perform the required operations in the market.
Honourable Members of the House,
6-2: The adoption of these three resolutions is of huge importance: to begin with, because it demonstrates the willingness of the Eurozone countries to take decisive action to resolve the current situation, and thus highlights our irrevocable commitment to the Euro; and also because it allows the Eurozone to take more effective action regarding its financial markets, employing the full range of instruments provided by the bailout funds, while more effectively involving the European Central Bank.
However, in accordance with that statement, I must also stress the following with absolute clarity: we must be realistic. The path down which Europe has been built has never been an easy one. The strategy has been agreed, as has the destination, but we are now seeing, and will in the future see, tensions, difficult unanimous votes, unhelpful declarations and numerous vicissitudes. We have, though, at least decided where we are headed, and agreed that we aim to get there as soon as possible. And I, of course, accept my responsibility before this House to do everything in my power to ensure that the agreements, and in particular the agreements that were passed, I reiterate, unanimously at this most recent European Council, are fulfilled with all possible haste.
6-4: The third pillar: structural reforms and the integration of markets at a Community level. In other words, the activation of the policies available to the European Union to foster growth. The European Council, aware of the difficult times faced by many of our economies, dedicated much of its attention to ways to stimulate economic growth. The so-called "Growth Pact" which was agreed stresses the need to mobilise all mechanisms, instruments and policies of the European Union to stimulate robust growth which will generate employment. The initial premise of the Pact is recognition of the importance of three fundamental principles. This is, I reiterate, the initial premise of the Pact: healthy public finances, structural reforms and investment specifically employed to achieve sustainable growth.
6-5: Beginning with these foundations, the European Council has reached conclusions as to the measures to be taken at a Community level. These measures are divided into two major blocks: a deeper internal market at every level, and mechanisms to make more finance available to the economy. Spain, as you would inevitably expect, supports this approach. The stimulation of growth has been one of our priorities since we took up our responsibilities in government. It is therefore vital that we achieve progress at a European level in both regards: first, a deeper-rooted implementation of a genuine internal market, through the introduction of structural reforms at a European level, and second, ensuring that finance reaches economic agents, in order to allow for growth, which will require the best possible use of the resources available to the Union.
This agenda is the reflection at a Community level of our own national agenda.
With regard to financing, as you know it has been agreed to mobilise resources equivalent to 1% of European GDP to support fast-track growth measures. These measures are, to a great extent, the result of the various proposals to foster growth in Europe which we have been discussing since the start of this year, and which received definitive support from the four most populous countries in the Eurozone at the meeting held on 22 June in Rome.
One aspect to which we have given particular attention is the financing of the private sector, and above all small- and medium-sized enterprises, which are suffering the turbulence in the credit markets with particular intensity. The resources of the European Investment Bank and Europe's Structural Funds will be dedicated to this purpose: to begin with, the European Investment Bank will by the end of the year increase its paid-in capital by ten billion euros, which would allow it to increase the credit it provides by sixty billion euros which, in addition to the one hundred and twenty billion euros represented by 1% of European GDP, makes for a total investment of 180 billion euros.
We have also agreed to launch the pilot phase of the Project Bond initiative, co-financed by the European Investment Bank and the EU's own budget. This will immediately make 4.5 billion euros of investment available in the transport, energy and telecommunications sectors. A figure which could be increased in accordance, naturally, with the results of these projects.
Those Member States which so wish will, meanwhile, be able to re-programme structural funds in favour of projects with risks shared with the EIB, in accordance with the standard rules and practices for such funds. I wish to stress in this regard that Spain has already undertaken a reallocation serving to increase efficiency in the use of the funds available.
The European Council also agreed to give an increased role to Community funds as instruments to foster growth and employment throughout Europe. In particular, with a view to the 2014-2020 Financial Perspectives, expenditure will be mobilised to support growth, employment, competitiveness and convergence.
As for the internal market, the European Council is determined to give this considerable added impetus. It is in this regard important that new proposals be submitted within the context of what is known as the Second Act of the Single Market.
We are here presented with a remarkable opportunity to revisit the momentum given by the Single Act to the internal market. A clear commitment to achieve a more deep-rooted integration of our markets, through specific measures, would undoubtedly have a positive impact on prospects for growth and would help speed up the recovery.
Likewise, the European Council views as essential the immediate application of the Services Directive, which could generate economic benefits in the Union of up to 330 billion euros.
The Council also committed to achieving clear progress in other areas: the Single Digital Market by 2015; development of a Single Energy Market, with a commitment that no Member State will remain in isolation beyond 2015, an underpinning of the European Research Area to generate investment opportunities for new companies and innovative SMEs.
With regard to the financial transaction tax, the difficulties in achieving agreement across all twenty-seven Member States have been confirmed. A number of States are, like us, prepared to consider possible avenues for progress through a strengthened cooperation procedure, which would allow concrete results to be achieved by the end of this year.
It is for Spain a matter of especial urgency that policies focusing on job creation be applied at a Community level, with a particular focus on youth unemployment and the reinsertion into the labour market of older workers. We have also confirmed the importance of supporting employment mobility within the Union through a range of instruments, in particular a strengthening of the acquisition and maintenance of pension entitlements and other social rights. We may in this regard note with pride that the Conclusions reflect a Spanish initiative.
Honourable members,
8-4: I will now transfer all this to the national dimension; to the specific steps that each Member State has to take within the full agenda that has been sketched out at this Council meeting. This is our part of the commitment we acquired when we joined the European project. For this, within the existing framework of economic policy coordination (the European Semester), this European Council meeting has supported the specific Recommendations prepared for each of the Member States - for all of them - based on an analysis of the National Reform Programmes and the Stability Programmes.
8-5: In general, in other words for everyone, these Recommendations include the need for each Member State to make progress in five areas: first, fiscal consolidation, adapted to the circumstances of each country and as a way of driving growth; second, restoration of the credit channel to the economy; third, boosting the competitiveness of our economies by reforms that promote flexibility; fourth, the fight against unemployment, with particular attention to the most vulnerable groups, and particularly young people; and fifth, modernisation of the public administrations, streamlining their structure, increasing their efficiency and bringing them closer to ordinary people.
8-6: Specifically for Spain, the Council has prepared Recommendations related to budget consolidation, the sustainability of the pension system, the fiscal system, a reform of the banking sector, the labour market, efficiency of public expenditure and a liberalisation of certain economic activities and sectors. In addition, Spain and sixteen other Member States of the Union that are subject to the excessive deficit procedure will have strict obligations that will lead to immediate sanctions in case of non-compliance. Among those relating to Spain, a new path of fiscal consolidation has been implemented that means the deficit of public administrations as a whole may not exceed 6.3% this year, 2012. Next year this figure will be reduced to 4.5% and finally in 2014 it will be at 2.8%.
You will have noted that the Council is sensitive to the situation of recession in the European Union and of Spain's starting position, with a deficit of 8.9% last year. That is why it has modified the demands for this year, which for our country were set at 5.3%; but aware of the need to strictly comply with these targets for the next three years, the Council has set a series of additional obligations.
The most important are as follows:
- First, make a structural fiscal adjustment effort of 2.7% of GDP in 2012, 2.5% in 2013 and 1.9% in 2014.
- Second, adopt measures included in the national budget for 2012 and in the rebalancing plans for the Autonomous Regions.
- Third, approve the Rebalancing Plan for 2013-2014 at the end of this month of July.
- Fourth, adopt without delay the measures needed to comply with the fiscal objectives for 2012.
- And also, adopt measures to reduce the risks of fiscal deviation and speed up the correction of the deficit in 2013 and 2014.
These Recommendations are not easy, but they are consistent with the core lines of action of my Government: to achieve budgetary stability and reform our economy.
Honourable Members,
Our commitment to these goals is unshakable, and we will do everything necessary for Spain to gain the competitiveness and flexibility it needs to grow again and create jobs.
In the current situation we are in today in Spain, growth and job creation is not possible. We are undergoing the second deepest recession in our history, with a slowdown of economic activity of close to 2%. Never before has the Spanish economy suffered two such deep recessions so close together. This is something that no one here has lived through; what is more, for next year all the forecasts suggest that the recession will continue, although closer to 0%. Honourable Members of the House, whether you like it or not, this is the reality we are facing.
These economic figures can be translated into what are the worst, most damaging indicators; those that cause the greatest harm to the welfare of Spanish people. Over the year the unemployment rate grew by three points and is over 50% in the case of young people. In the same period, registered unemployment increased by nearly half a million people and the number of companies that have closed totalled 32,094.
This situation has much to do with the financial drought. Finance for families has fallen by 2.7% and corporate lending by 3.7%.
The excesses of the past are being paid now, because the real cause of this situation is the high level of debt of all the economic agents; of all of them, public and private.
We have an extremely high public deficit: in the Eurozone as a whole it is 4% of GDP, while Spain closed 2011 with a figure of 8.9%, 90 billion euros, or more than double. That is the reality and what I have to explain in this House is the reality. I will not go into who is responsible or not; but if we do not explain the reality, we cannot operate with a view to the future.
The public debt will hit 79.8% at the end of the year; whereas in 2007, only five years ago, it was 36%. Consider, Honourable Members, that this percentage means that all the levels of government in Spain have a debt of eight hundred billion euros.
These eight hundred billion euros have to be refinanced when they fall due, and at the moment, this refinance is at an interest of at least 6%. This makes you realise where we stand now.
All our economy, in other words both the public and private sector, is heavily indebted abroad. This debt accounts for 165% of GDP in gross terms, in other words 1,800 billion euros. Taking off what we have invested outside our country, we still owe 977 billion euros, practically our whole GDP. In comparison, the net external debt of Italy is a fifth of its GDP, or 21%; that of France is 11%; that of the United Kingdom, 14%; of the United States, 17%; while Germany is a net creditor to the tune of 36.3%.
I am giving you these figures, not for any political reason, but simply to let this House know what our situation is: It is not the same to owe the amount of your GDP outside Spain as it is to owe 21% of GDP, or 11% of GDP, or 17%. If Spain did not have to look for finance abroad, we would not have any type of problem with the markets; but it so happens that we owe the same amount as our gross domestic product abroad; and we should at least know that and assume it so that we can then take decisions to correct this situation.
Honourable Members of the House,
We still have problems of competitiveness with our partners, which generate doubts about our capacity to grow. In the different indices Spain has recovered nearly half the competitiveness lost; that is true. But this has been based on increasing productivity by reducing jobs, which is the worst system possible. That is why the labour reform has aimed to improve flexibility and wage moderation as a fairer and more efficient method than redundancy.
10-3: However, I want to tell you here that there are some positive indicators: Spanish inflation is half a percentage point below the Eurozone average, unlike what happened during the rest of our period as a member of the Monetary Union; and the foreign sector has made a more than notable process of correction, from 11% in 2008 to practically a balance at the end of this year. 
But despite these figures, which are positive, Honourable Members, the situation I have presented is rather grave. And there is also a reality that should always be in our thoughts: 5,600,000 people leave their homes every day in search of work they do not find and each and every one of our actions must always keep this in mind.
As I already said at the Investiture Debate, in politics the inheritance is not received under benefit of inventory. In other words, there is no point in arguing with what you find. Now, it is the mission of my Government to free Spain from the weight of this inheritance.
10-5: That is why we are determined to meet our commitments in the field of fiscal consolidation. Our European partners also expect the greatest responsibility, discipline and diligence from us. We must correct the problem of the public deficit, not only because that is an essential rule for the operation of the Monetary Union and an obligation resulting from belonging to the Eurozone, but because in this way we will channel to the private sector the necessary resources to finance consumption and private investment, which is what boosts economic activity.
But in addition to this, if we do not reduce the deficit we will endanger the provision of public services in the medium term. And that is not a contradiction in terms. The deficit means increasing debt and increased debt means greater spending on interest payments. This takes away our room for manoeuvre to provide public services efficiently and fairly. Honourable Members, we are now paying interest at a level clearly above 6%.
Honourable Members,
We have started from very high levels of budget imbalance in a very difficult economic scenario. Since December we have been applying budgetary adjustments aimed at correcting the deficit.
Now the recession and the Recommendations approved yesterday at the ECOFIN meeting, within the framework of the Excessive Deficit Procedure, advise not only a reduction in expenditure, but an increase in revenues.
We have to make additional efforts to ensure compliance with the budget adjustment and the path we are committed to. But that is not sufficient on its own. We also have to improve the operation of our administrations and make structural reforms to boost our economy's flexibility and competitiveness.
I will refer to these three points; specifically, to the improvement in the way our administrations work; to making additional efforts on the question of expenditure and revenues; and to introducing structural reforms to boost our economy's flexibility and competitiveness. And I am going to tell you some of the main decisions that we have begun to adopt as of now.
First, we have to begin with a reform of the public administration services to put a premium on austerity, achieve greater efficiency and avoid overlapping, under the premise of "one administration, one competence". That is the essential objective of the reform to ensure the streamlining and sustainability of local government. To do so, the competences of each level of government will be limited. This will put an end to the problem of inappropriate competences, so that local councils will not be able to offer services that do not have the necessary finance behind them. And the role of the Provincial Councils will be strengthened in order to centralise the provision of services.
Thus this reform will guarantee that small municipalities can receive appropriate public services at reasonable prices and that they are better managed. The estimates from studies carried out suggest that savings here will be in the area of 3.5 billion euros.
In addition, there will be an improvement in the control of the public accounts at a local level, with more impartiality by the municipal auditor and civil servants with powers at a national level.
One of the main new points will be the standardisation and publication of the remuneration of mayors and local councillors. To this end, each year's national budget will set the benchmarks for the remuneration of mayors and local councillors according to the characteristics of the municipality. At the same time, the number of councillors per population band will be reduced by around 30% on the figures established under Article 179.1 of the Constitutional Law on the General Election System.
Another measure in this field will be a drastic reduction, and even elimination, of State-owned companies at a local level. If we analyse the functions that these companies have been carrying out so far, we find in many cases there is overlapping, and even a double overlapping of services; this leads to an evident waste of public expenditure and large-scale inefficiencies.
Honourable Members,
This institutional reform requires action at all levels. The Autonomous Regions must also take their own decisions to achieve the goals I have set out just now. In other words: put a premium on austerity, achieve greater efficiency and avoid overlapping.
Today we have to intensify our efforts to guarantee compliance with the path that we have set out for reducing the deficit. I say this because to achieve it we need a commitment from everyone, and in particular the Autonomous Regions, who manage a large part of the country's public resources.
Budgetary stability has meant a qualitative leap of enormous importance in relations between Central Government and the Autonomous Regions, in the very institutional architecture of the State. After the constitutional reform, there was the passing of the Constitutional Law on Budgetary Stability, an agreement was reached in the Fiscal and Financial Policy Council to approve adjustment plans and a Payment Plan has been implemented for suppliers to be paid commercial debts pending and thus to put the public accounts in order.
Honourable Members,
Now it is the turn of the Autonomous Regions to prove that they too are complying and gaining credibility so that they can all once more finance themselves normally in the market. As you know, this is something that is not the case today.
In fact, tomorrow there will be a meeting of the Fiscal and Financial Policy Council with three essential items on the agenda:
- To set the deficit target for the years 2013 and 2014.
- To review the application of the economic and financial plans of the Autonomous Regions that were approved in April, in line with the Excessive Deficit Procedure. Depending on the level of application of the plans approved, the corrective mechanisms in the Budgetary Stability Act will be put into action.
- To implement a financial instrument that guarantees sufficient liquidity so that the Autonomous Regions can meet their financial commitments. As you all know, this is something that does not happen today. This mechanism will include the financial and commercial debt maturities.
All this will be done with conditions and additional control from Central Government, which will require the Autonomous Regions to use their legal capacity and decision-making capacity in the area of revenues and expenses.
- Third, there will be a complete review of the civil service. Public-sector employment must adapt to the economic reality of the time.
The wages and salaries paid by the public administration services is one of the biggest items in the budget. The number of public-sector employees has grown considerably over recent years. Just think, since the start of the economic crisis in 2007, more than 2,900,000 jobs have been destroyed in the private sector, while in the public sector the number of employees has grown by 289,000.
These are the figures.
To try to find a better balance between public and private employment, apart from not replacing jobs, as already included in the 2012 budget, additional measures will be taken to allow progress to be made towards a model of civil service that is capable of generating savings in this area through greater efficiency.
For example:
* The number of personal days off will be reduced.
* The number of "freed trade unionists" will be adjusted to reflect strictly the figure included in the law.
* The conditions of workers with temporary incapacity will be made the same as for the rest of workers.
* Mobility of public-sector employees will be encouraged.
Given the economic circumstances, which are exceptionally serious, we are asking for what is also an exceptional effort from public-sector employees and senior civil servants: this year 2012 payment of the second extra monthly payment for the year will be suspended. This measure will be applied to the senior positions in central, regional and local government, and I ask that this effort is also shared by those of us who are Members of the Upper and Lower Houses of Parliament. Only in the case of public-sector employees will this suspension be compensated, as from 2015, by a corresponding contribution in the form of a pension fund.
Fourth, we are going to significantly reduce the number of companies and State-owned foundations. To do so, we will undertake the second phase of the Business and Foundation Public Sector Restructuring Plan.
So, that explains the decisions we will be taking in terms of reforming the Public Administration Services, decisions that will undoubtedly have an enormous impact on cutting down public expenditure. However, those decisions will also be accompanied by a series of other budgetary measures.
In terms of spending cuts specifically, a further adjustment will be made to the spending budgets assigned to the ministerial departments. This cut will amount to 600 million euros this year. All budgetary credits earmarked for subsidies, current goods and services, and transfers will be reduced for what remains of 2012.
I can also announce that the Budget for 2013 will include another 20% cut to the subsidies paid to political parties, trade unions and business organisations, which can be added to the cut already made in 2012.
In order to guarantee its sustainability, spending within the long-term care system will be streamlined by performing a review on the scale and the economic benefits paid out.
On the matter of employment, a large number of the current tax credit schemes associated with recruitment will be withdrawn except those related to the new contract for entrepreneurs and the insertion of people with disability into the labour market.
A review will be undertaken of the unemployment benefit model to ensure that such benefits do not lead to reduced incentives in the search for employment, thus following the example set by certain countries of the European Union. The maximum period for receiving unemployment benefits will remain unchanged (at twenty-four months) and the current benefit amounts will be maintained during the first six months. However and in order to encourage the search for employment, new benefit recipients who join the system will see their benefits reduced after the sixth month from 60% to 50% of the calculation basis.
I would also like to announce, in terms of the Social Security system, that I intend to bring a Draft Bill to the Toledo Pact aimed at speeding up the application of the sustainability factor and tackling the treatment of early retirement; as stated in the Recommendation from the European Union.
Honourable Members,
I am presenting a balanced package of measures to this House, a package that combines spending adjustments with revenue initiatives that follow the Recommendations made by the European Council. I will now move on to the steps to be taken in terms of revenue.
On Friday, the Council of Ministers will approve additional revenue measures that will help ensure we do not stray from the fiscal path committed to with our European partners and that will also mean the start of a change to the tax structure in our country, in accordance with the European Recommendations.
We will be raising indirect taxation by increasing VAT and environmental taxation and by reducing taxation on employment. The general rate of VAT will increase by 3%, from 18% to 21%.
The reduced rate of VAT will increase from 8% to 10% and the super-reduced rate will remain at 4% for all basic necessities.
Furthermore, Social Security contributions will be lowered by 1% in 2013 and a further 1% in 2014.
In short, Honourable Members, this action is aimed at meeting the targets defined in the Stability Programme of the Kingdom of Spain and, through increased indirect taxation, reducing the fiscal gap to encourage the creation of jobs.
Furthermore, environmental taxation will be reformed in order to encourage the principle of "he who pollutes, pays" in our tax system, a principle that has already taken root in many neighbouring countries.
We are also including an increase to the tax on tobacco as part of our measures on indirect taxation.
In addition, changes will also be made to the system whereby Corporate Income Tax is paid in quarterly instalments.
Also in line with the Recommendations made by the European Union, the property-based tax deduction for new buyers will be withdrawn from 2013.
Overall, this fiscal consolidation package (including both revenue and spending cuts) will represent a figure of 65 billion euros over the next two and a half years.
Honourable Members of the House,
Besides the inevitable fiscal consolidation, we must also undertake the structural reforms that our economy needs in order to regain its competitiveness and flexibility and to generate growth and create jobs. To do so, the Government has launched an ambitious programme of structural reforms. The three large-scale reforms (i.e. the labour market reform, the financial sector reform and the new budgetary stability framework) are joined by a large number of measures that we have been adopting and will continue to adopt for a single purpose: to ensure the Spanish economy becomes more competitive.
It is essential that we speed up the schedule for these structural reforms. The steps aimed at improving the goods, services and factor markets are essential for enabling economic activity and economic quality to grow, as well as for effectively competing in the international markets.
We must undertake reforms aimed at reducing costs for our citizens and for companies, and at boosting production activity.
From among the reforms we will be undertaking in the short term, I can highlight the following:
Firstly, the next stage of the energy sector reform will be presented. The cost of energy is a decisive factor in the competitiveness of our economy. In fact, energy accounts for 50% of production costs in some parts of the industrial sector and also has a strong impact on the CPI. The energy policy decisions that were taken over the last eight years have set aside the priority to supply energy at the lowest cost possible and led to a vast tariff deficit that we plan to resolve once and for all. I would like to inform the Honourable Members of the House that the solution to the tariff deficit, which now stands at over twenty-five billion euros, will come from distributing the deficit among the various sectors involved via a new energy tax model.
Secondly, an ambitious programme will be launched to effectively guarantee market unity. Market unity constitutes a fundamental and unavoidable economic principle for the competitive functioning of the Spanish economy. We are going to provide a structural solution to the complicated regulatory framework faced by Spanish companies. This framework, besides being disperse, inconsistent and containing numerous overlaps, has led to the fragmentation of the domestic market, impedes company growth and raises costs.
The principle of immediate effectiveness for the powers granted by the Public Administration Services throughout Spain will be guaranteed by law and accreditation and certification effects will be standardised. There will no longer be multiple controls by various administration services and it will also be possible to implement the mechanisms necessary to strengthen cooperation between the various Public Administration Services. In addition, a flexible mechanism will be established for resolving conflicts between economic operators and the Public Administration Services, which will also help remove any obstacles to market unity.
Thirdly, we must achieve progress on the reforms and deregulation of the services sector. This sector in Spain accounts for more than two thirds of the Gross Domestic Product and employment. It is therefore one of the main driving forces behind our economy. For that reason, we must ensure that this sector functions properly by removing barriers and any anti-competition positions that only lead to lower quality services and higher prices.
One of the sectors with the greatest potential for growth and exports is that of professional services. In fact, there is increasing international recognition of the export potential from the professional and company services sector, which includes such enterprises as consultancy firms. In order to help boost their growth, we intend to strengthen the principle of freedom of access to service activity and the freedom to exercise such professional activities.
Furthermore, the reforms already undertaken in the commercial distribution sector will be enhanced by increased flexibility in terms of trading hours, especially in tourist destinations, so as to improve quality of service and provide traders with greater flexibility for adopting those commercial strategies they deem fit.
A process of deregulation will also be undertaken and, where appropriate, we will privatise the services associated with railway transport, sea ports and airports.
Honourable members,
I have tried to inform you, in as much detail as time allows, about the agreements from the European Council, the situation of the Spanish economy and the immediate measures that my Government proposes we adopt.
As far as the agreements from the Summit are concerned, the most pressing issue according to the summaries contained in the text of the Conclusions is the urgent recovery of stability in the markets.
As far as Spain is concerned, we intend to combat the deficit and make progress on the programme of reforms in our economy.
I am aware that the measures I have announced here are not pleasant. None of them would be individually and they are even less so when looked at as a whole. They may not be pleasant but they are entirely essential. We find ourselves in an extraordinarily serious situation that must be corrected with absolute urgency. The money we are borrowing to pay our debt is costing us 7% and that means a large part of the sacrifices being made by the Spanish people are going towards increased debt repayments.
The fact is, Honourable Members, that we need to borrow money to even pay our unemployment benefits, the wages of our civil servants, healthcare services or education services. And we need to borrow that money because our public spending exceeds our revenue by tens of billions of euros. Last year, I need not go further, we spent ninety billion euros (fifteen trillion pesetas) more than we had.
That is the deficit in a nutshell. We cannot survive without loans from abroad but it has become so expensive to get them that we are trapped in an unsustainable vicious circle from which we need to escape as soon as possible.
We stand at a crucial juncture that will determine our future, that of our families, our young people, our well-being and that of all our hopes and dreams.
That is the reality, Honourable Members, and there is no other way to put it. We are in dire straits and I cannot stress enough how important it is that we get out of this position as soon as possible.
There is no room for fantasy or witty remarks because there is no room for anything; either we reduce our spending or we increase our revenue or, if we have no choice, we do both.
We have neither law nor criteria besides that which necessity has imposed upon us. We are doing all that is left for us to do, whether we like it or not.
I am the first to be doing something I do not like to do. I said I would lower taxes but I am actually raising them. I have not changed my criteria nor do I disregard the possibility of lowering them as soon as possible, but the circumstances have changed and I must adapt to those new circumstances. Honourable Members, I am taking the only option left available to me to climb out of this hole. Whether I like doing it is irrelevant. I am applying the exceptional measures demanded of me by exceptional times.
We are trying to progress steadily down a path that is not easy, nor short, nor pleasant but one we cannot avoid because it is the only path that leads to recovery and is the path we simply must follow, the path we shall not stray from, as has been the case since day one.
Nonetheless, no-one should think that a Government can solve these problems alone. This will require collaboration from everyone with the obligation to contribute towards the common goal. I am talking about all of you, those who represent the national sovereignty; I am talking about regional governments and local authorities; about business leaders and workers; and about the press. In short, I am talking about society as a whole. Either we all work together on achieving the same objectives or our efforts will be hollow. Either we really and truly demonstrate we are a nation that is willing to make sacrifices in order to earn ourselves a better future or our efforts will be in vain.
I know the steps we are taking and those we are going to take hurt everybody, each one of us, as a consumer, as a pensioner, as a housewife, however you want to put it. It hurts that incomes go down while taxes go up; but this is what must be done because only through such individual sacrifice will we be able to save what we share.
The people of Spain have reached a point at which we can no longer choose between standing still or making sacrifices. We do not have such freedom. The circumstances are not so generous.
The only option afforded to us by the reality is to accept the sacrifices and give up a little or reject the sacrifices and give up everything.
The only question that should matter to us now is: Will it work? Will so much hardship and so many cutbacks do any good? The answer is a resounding "yes".
I have no doubt, Honourable Members. I would not be standing here if I did. I am convinced that recompense awaits us at the end of this period of sacrifice.
Spain is not lost because it still conserves economic, structural, demographic and even moral strengths that will enable us, once we leave these financial and deficit problems behind us, to recover everything we have lost, step by step.
The task will not be an easy, fast or pleasant one. It will be tough, it will demand sacrifices and it will take time. But it can be done, we can do it and we have already started. We must not allow our sacrifices to have been in vain because they will enable us to achieve everything we have set our sights upon.
Let nobody imagine we are going to reduce the scope of our ambitions for Spain. It would be very easy to make do with less, to lower our aspirations or limit our efforts. We will not do that. We will not allow our ambitions for Spain to wither. We want to attain everything we are capable of achieving and we will work tirelessly to achieve that.
Does Spain have the courage and the determination necessary to maintain this discipline long enough? Yes, now and in the future, because Spain knows what is at stake and because my Government, the Government chosen by the people of Spain for this task, will perform its duty until it achieves what it set out to achieve.
Above all else, we will be driven towards our goal by the more than five million people unable to find a job. That is our greatest incentive and not the risk premium or the cost of debt or our financial health. What gives colour and urgency and sadness to the debt and the deficit are the millions of people who are paying for the consequences. I am far more concerned by the unemployment queues than by balancing the economy but I must focus my attention on balancing the economy because the future of those unemployment queues depends on it.
That is our moral legitimacy, Honourable Members. That is what gives meaning to the efforts, the sacrifices and the hardships. That is what justifies our work, drives us forward and ensures our commitment to not letting up until we achieve our goal, because we are talking about the hopes of millions of families and, in particular, the hopes of those young people in Spain who are waiting to gaze upon a future to which we have not yet managed to open the door.
We will open that door, we are working on it and let me reassure you, Honourable Members, that with the help of many Spaniards, and they will be counted as many, we will remain steadfast until the end without changing our course, reducing our momentum or easing our resolve.
That is all Mr Speaker, and thank you very much.

