Press conference by the Prime Minister of Portugal and the President of the Government
Lisbon, (Portugal), Tuesday 24 January 2012
[part of the speech]
http://www.lamoncloa.gob.es/lang/en/presidente/intervenciones/Paginas/2012/20120124_PdG_PressConfWitjPMPortugal.aspx 
President of the Government. Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon to you all.
I would like to start this short speech by thanking the Prime Minister for his warm welcome and the treatment we received. For me, as a Spaniard, it is a great honour and I am proud that my first visit as the President of the Government to a European Union country should be here, to Portugal; a much-loved country in my eyes as I am from Galicia and I have had the opportunity to travel the length and breadth of this country on many occasions.
I should like to convey to the Portuguese people the solidarity and affection of the Spanish people, who feel empathy with the difficulties suffered here and are willing to jointly seek a framework of confidence and prosperity for the future.
I believe that the Prime Minister has explained the objectives of this meeting very well. I will make a few comments and probably go into more detail in some of the areas he has touched upon.
We have spoken about the difficult situation that our economies are going through, both the Portuguese economy and the Spanish economy, and the difficulties that many Portuguese and Spanish citizens are going though at these times, and we have spoken about the measures that the two Governments are currently implementing.
I would like to say that the Portuguese Government, at least that is how I see it, is acting very bravely, very courageously and very determinedly, tackling a very difficult situation that demands many sacrifices; but I am absolutely convinced that, should it continue in this serious and sensible manner, it will soon see the effects of good policies.
For our part, in Spain we will do something similar, because we need to do that, and we are going to have to, some have already had to, take difficult decisions looking at the medium- and long-term to move towards an era of sustainable and stable growth.
1-7: Only five days after taking power, my Government took a decision to reduce the public deficit by 15 billion euros. We had to raise takes by six billion euros and reduce expenditure by nine billion euros, and in the coming weeks we will present the labour reform act, a plan to restructure our financial system and this coming Friday, in the Council of Ministers, a Budgetary Stability Act that will affect all public authorities, both Central Government, the autonomous regions and local councils, to the effect that they cannot spend what they do not have. I repeat that these decisions, and some more, quite a few more in fact, that will need to be taken in the future are necessary and essential for Spain and, if you will allow me, for Portugal as well, in my opinion.
1-8: We have also spoken about Europe, because although we all need to put our own houses in order and do our own homework, it is also important that these things are done well jointly in Europe.
Spain is in favour of the Treaty that will be debated on 30 January in Brussels. We would like it to be definitively approved, to be signed straight away, come into force and that we all comply with our commitments. We are in favour of the Treaty, because we are in favour of controlling the public deficit, of not having high public debt, and because we are in favour of having a bailout mechanism, the bigger the better, that can operate as a deterrent against certain things taking place that we have seen recently.
2-1: We are also in favour of finding a solution quickly to the problem of Greece. I believe it is something that should be done as soon as possible to return to a situation of normality with the objective of creating jobs and recovering economic growth.
We will support, because it is a debate that will be raised there, all the reforms that are necessary to improve the competitiveness of our economies - Portugal has just announced its labour reform and Spain will also make its proposal in the coming weeks - and they need to be implemented; but it is also important at this time that there are liquidity instruments that enable the economy to be financed and that support is given to those who meet their objectives, are serious and keep their word.
Hence, I believe that we agree on the fundamental issues. I believe that it is very important for the two countries to have a constant collaboration, almost on a daily basis. I believe that a great many things unite Portugal and Spain, as all of you are aware; but I believe that what unites us most is our future and we are going to work to attain this future. That is why we want these bilateral Summits, the last of which was held in 2009, to once again take place and, as the Prime Minister announced, we will hold a meeting in the spring to tackle bilateral issues; as of now we will begin working on the agenda and content of this Summit.
For Spain it is also very important, and I believe that for the whole of Ibero-America, that the Ibero-American Summit that is scheduled to take place in November in the city of Cadiz is a success. I believe that Ibero-America is important for both Spain and Portugal. So many things unite our two countries, above all, as in our own case, the future necessarily unites us.
Thank you very much. I repeat, for me it is a real pleasure and an honour to be here, once again, in this magnificent city of Lisbon.
Q. Mr. President, good afternoon. The International Monetary Fund calculates a deficit for Spain in 2012 of no less than 6.8% and 6.3% for 2013. With these figures, Mr. President, do you still maintain that Spain is in a position to comply with the figure of 4.4% set by Europe? If that is the case, will there be more cuts, more budgetary measures? At any event, do you believe that Europe will be flexible in the deficit objective for the Eurozone?
I had a second question, which almost goes hand-in-hand. As regards the labour reform, it would seem that an agreement in principle was reached. Can you announce anything in this respect and assess this measure, this labour reform, please?
President of the Government. That is right, the International Monetary Fund, in the last few days, as well as announcing negative growth for Spain for 2012 and even for the following year, 2013, announced today the deficit figures for 2012 and even for 2013. Economic forecasts are always debatable, regardless of which body they emanate from, the IMF, the European Commission, the Government itself or any other political party; but, from this announcement or this forecast of the IMF, I take away one thing: this reaffirms for me the fact that we need to do our homework.
We have already made a reduction in our public deficit, I repeat, in the first Council of Ministers on 30 December, of 15 billion euros. I believe that we have to continue making reductions in the Budget and we will do this in this year's Budget, which we will present in the first quarter of the year, as I said, in the month of March, and we will once again reduce expenditure. But I believe that this should be accompanied by economic growth policies, because we are not only fighting against the deficit through reducing expenditure, but also through increasing revenue. That is why the structural reforms are so important and that is why we will carry out a labour reform and a reform of the financial system; we will then move on to energy policy and afterwards, or at the same time, to the Law in support of entrepreneurs.
Hence, the forecasts of the IMF are a stimulus for me to work harder and more courageously, at a time which for Spain is very difficult. Furthermore, the effects of the policies will not be seen in three months or six months, but we are obliged to work to create jobs and to work hard to do so. That is what my Government is going to do. We know that things are not going well, that things are tough, and it is not necessary that the International Monetary Fund reminds us of that, although it may, as it has done; but, I repeat, for me this is a stimulus to do things well in the future.
As regards the labour reform, what has already been announced, or filtered through, or we have become aware of, is an agreement in principle. Hence, any assessment that I may make on this matter is conditional upon a binding agreement being reached. In reality, this agreement relates to salary conditions for the coming three years: 2012, 2013 and 2014. Should what we have heard be confirmed, I would have to say that the trade unions and business associations have done what Spain needs. The measure they have announced is also complex and probably difficult to take, but I believe that it would be a very positive step forward and a wonderful message to send to the economy of this country. Let's hope this is confirmed because, I repeat, it would be good for Spain.
From thereon in, it is something that falls to the will of the parties; it is simply our obligation to agree on the areas on which no agreement is reached, which is basically on the matters that comprise the labour reform, in making a proposal. As the Government, it falls to us to submit the proposal to Parliament, and as I said before, we will do this at the right time.
So, if what we have heard is confirmed and what we have seen published in various media is confirmed, I would have to say that this is a wonderful message and something very positive for the general interests of all Spaniards.
Q. I had a question for the President of the Spanish Government. Merely a clarification, do you believe that the European Union authorities, given that the forecasts of the International Monetary Fund not only apply to Spain, but to all economies, including the European powerhouses, will in some way relax the conditions for complying with the deficit objective, I insist, not only in the peripheral countries but in the whole of the European Union?
I also had another question that is not related to the economy. I wanted to ask whether the President of the Government believes that the terrorist organisation ETA has a latent infrastructure and if so, whether this latent infrastructure could have its base or try to establish its base here in Portugal. The same question is for Mr. Coelho if he wishes to respond to it.
President of the Government. The first question you asked is about whether, in light of the growth forecasts for the European Union, a change will take place in the deficit objectives of all the countries in the European Union. We'll look at that in a moment.
What I would like to say is that Spain will meet its deficit objectives as set out in the Stability Programme. Have no doubt about that. It is currently set at 4.4% and Spain will meet that objective.
As regards the matter of ETA, I am going to say something that I believe all Spaniards understand very well: ETA exists, it exists today. ETA has said that it will stop killing and that this is definitive.
I am all in favour of that and I celebrated at the time this announcement that they would stop killing definitively. But ETA still exists and while ETA still exists it is a terrorist organisation and hence the Rule of Law is not suspended in Spain.
In other words, a member of a terrorist organisation is an outlaw and hence, the obligation of the State law enforcement agencies and of the Government, logically, is to act. Hence, while ETA exists, the Rule of Law in Spain is not suspended. It is never suspended, but much less so all the time ETA exists as a terrorist organisation; the Law and the Rule of Law will be applied because that is our obligation, quite apart from my own conviction.

