Speech by the President of the Government, Mariano Rajoy, in the closing Session of the Forum "Europe: next steps", at the Institute of Governance
Paris (France), Tuesday 28 May 2013

http://www.lamoncloa.gob.es/lang/en/presidente/intervenciones/Paginas/2013/20130528_FORUM_EUROPE.aspx 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would first like to express my gratitude to Nicolas Berggruen for inviting me here to be with you this afternoon and to congratulate him for his sustained commitment to reflection and debate on Europe. The Institute on Governance which he presides has in a short time become a benchmark of reliability and thoroughness; I congratulate him on this.
This seminar is a good example of this: both through its participants and through the subject matter it covers. Interesting ideas and proposals have emerged here which will help to overcome this crisis, which without doubt is one of the worst we have faced in Europe.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Paris, the city which is playing host to us, has been the scene where great pages of history have come to light. Bearing in mind what is of concern to us today, I will focus on one which was written 63 years ago, also in the month of May, when Robert Schuman, then France's Foreign Affairs Minister, delivered his famous address which was to become the point of departure for the process of European construction.
"Blow by blow, verse by verse", in the words of the Spanish poet Antonio Machado, European history of these past sixty years has cemented the peace between former enemies and embedded in them the sense of belonging to a community of values. Successive enlargements -from the six founder members up to twenty eight, with the forthcoming entry of Croatia  - are the finest example of the way the conflicts on our continent have been overcome and of the will to share, increasingly, the common destiny we have chosen.
1-5: However, this assessment of the European project as a guarantee of the longest period of peace and prosperity in Europe's history is wearing thin and it is healthy to recognise this. Our young people -most of you- have grown up in a Europe in which war, a regular protagonist of our history for centuries, is no longer seen as a threat. And even historic achievements like the freedom of circulation, the disappearance of physical borders, the common currency or the rights of European citizens are taken for granted.
In my country, in Spain, which continues to be very closely linked to the European project, it had a magnetism which attracted the whole of society and was founded on the drawing power of freedom, democracy and prosperity. Without claiming that this magnetism has faded, it is true that the times and circumstances have changed. It is necessary to renew the project to ensure it has life, vigour and importance in a 21st century which is shaped by new challenges and new paradigms of development.
This is why we must do whatever it takes to ensure our fellow citizens view the European Union as an essential contribution to the solution of our current problems and an exciting project for the future. And we must act now, because the world will not stop turning while it waits for Europe to sort out its problems.
Dear friends,
2-2: Europe faces two crises, which are very closely related to each other. An economic crisis, whose clearest manifestation is unemployment, and the slump in activity. We are the only continent, the only one, to have suffered a double dip recession during this international financial crisis. And a political crisis, reflected in citizens' disaffection, mistrust and indifference to the European unification project. We policy makers are obliged to resolve both crises.
And from this starting point, allow me to share with you a series of reflections about what we are doing and a series of proposals about what I think we should do.
Dear friends,
Almost a year ago, I wrote a letter to the Presidents of the European Council and of the Commission in which I outlined my vision of the task ahead for all European governments. The intention was to explain the strategies, both at national and European level, which all of us together should set in motion in order to overcome the current crisis.
2-5: This is a crisis which has been aggravated by mistakes and indecisiveness, both by national and Community authorities, when applying reforms. The result has been that our economies are not flexible enough to tackle the challenges of monetary union, and that there remain important weaknesses in its design which need to be corrected. 
2-6: I suggested in my letter five lines of action and reform, two at national level and three at european level.-First, fiscal consolidation.-Second, reforms within each of the States. -Third, reforms within the framework of the European Union to strengthen the internal market,-Fourth, ensuring the financing of our economies and-Fifth, the reform of the design of our European and Monetary Union, through stronger banking and fiscal integration. Well, one year on, no doubt we are better off than then :- The worst of the crisis is over -No one doubts that the Euro is irreversible -And the monetary storms have abated.Without doubt, important progress has been made but this must not allow us to become at all complacent because there is still much to do.
3-1: With regard to national measures, resolute progress has been made in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. In my country, in Spain, in one year we have reduced the primary structural deficit by 3.5% of Gross Domestic Product, which is unprecedented among OECD countries, and this at a time of economic recession, and with the toughest financing conditions in memory. We are determined to continue reducing this deficit until we comply with our pledge, both national and European, to achieve structural equilibrium in our public accounts. And yes, it is true that I have been obliged to take decisions which are as painful as they are inevitable. I am not saying this because of the unpopularity which it entails, but for us all to be aware that citizens need to perceive that the sacrifices which European integration demands will have tangible compensation in the near future.
3-2: Budgetary stability, in my opinion, is a prerequisite for growth and prosperity. Its clearest benefit, under normal conditions, is improved access to more and cheaper credit. This is what happens under normal circumstances, but when monetary union is fragmented, its routes of transmission are blocked and the euro's institutional weaknesses become so evident. Then, the beneficial effects of the stability policy also slow to an exasperating level.
3-3: In these circumstances, logic requires us to moderate the pace of fiscal consolidation to adapt it to the current reality. This is a proposal for the European Commission to deal with and one that affects all the Eurozone countries. If, very soon, the Commission decides to formally propose to the Council a different timetable from that initially established for the necessary fiscal consolidation, we shall support this proposal. The main issue is commitment to the goal of stability; the time allowed to reach this goal is an element which must be adapted to the exceptional financial circumstances and the present recession, as set out in the Excessive Deficit Procedure. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
3-4: In Spain, we have carried out many highly important structural reforms, including labour reform and the restructuring of our financial system. And we have adopted these, not only because of our European commitment and our pro-European outlook, but because we believe that, in an open and competitive world, and within a monetary union, if we wish to preserve our social model and the prosperity of our fellow citizens, any other option is illusory. 
These measures are enabling us to correct some of our largest macroeconomic imbalances, apart from the public deficit I have already mentioned: 
* The inflation in Spain is at historically low levels and will be reduced this year to 1%.
* We are rapidly gaining competitiveness. Spanish unit labour costs are behaving exceptionally well.
* We have gone from an unsustainable external deficit of over 10% of GDP just a few years ago to a surplus which will exceed 2.5% this year.
* For the first time in over forty years, we have achieved a favourable balance of trade, as well as a large surplus in services, thanks to a sustained increase in our exports, which has occurred despite the recession affecting the economies of our principal customers.
* Our financial system has made an unprecedented effort to restructure this year: over 7% of GDP, which places our institutions among the most highly capitalised in the continent.
Dear friends,
As Spain is the country with the highest youth unemployment in Europe, it is understandable that we are not prepared to waste a moment in combating it. Our young people need work and helping them to find it is the best social policy which can be undertaken.
This is why I feel the reform and adaptation of our education and professional training systems is especially important. My Government presented to the Spanish Parliament a week ago a bill for the improvement of educational standards.
Furthermore, last Friday we passed a bill supporting entrepreneurs and their internationalisation.  This is a very ambitious law which stimulates the creation of companies, their taxation, their funding and their international expansion. It is a law which complements the measures passed two months ago in support of entrepreneurship and youth employment.
I want to say here that we will continue down the path of reform, even when, sooner rather than later, the fruits of these initiatives begin to be seen. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let us set aside for now the details of Spain's contribution, in order to focus on European institutions. I will say this and try to be clear and balanced.
It is fair to say that in the past year European institutions have taken important decisions. However, as I said earlier, Europe is the only region in the world which is not growing, the only one. We are in recesion for six months now and it is understandable for citizens to ask themselves what we are doing wrong. My response is unambiguous: Europe must do more, better, faster and more effectively.
The first thing we need is to comply with and apply what has been agreed and decided, something that seems basic but has to be done: to turn "de facto solidarity" into "real certainties". To turn the lines of text of the conclusions of European Council meetings into credible and verifiable commitments. Being responsible means complying with what has been agreed.
4-6: Almost a year ago - I am sure Mr. Monti recalls -, the Eurosummit in June adopted far-reaching decisions, both on the design of European and Monetary Union and on restarting growth and employment. The first steps were taken for the creation of banking union and fiscal union, essential complements for strengthening monetary union. It was proposed to advance much further in economic union in order to harmonise the behaviours of our economies and increase their efficiency. And all this could not be done without going substantially further toward political union.
4-7: Well, this greater integration has been enshrined in the Road Map issued by Herman van Rompuy and the Presidents of the Commission, the European Central Bank and Eurogroup. A document that had important contributions from many of us who were there. In addition, at that Eurosummit, it was agreed to strengthen liquidity provision mechanisms to reduce the financial fragmentation of the eurozone and to take measures to break the vicious circle between banks and sovereign debt.
A year on, it is right that we recognise the progress which has been made, although it is not enough and the next European Council meeting at the end of June is a crucial and decisive occasion to demonstrate that the European Union is honouring its agreements and that it is capable of implementing them effectively.
5-2: Accordingly, the test of the European Union's credibility at the next European Council meeting will be banking union; this is the credibility test. The recent crisis in Cyprus, which, despite the low relative weight of its economy, destabilised the Eurozone a few months ago, has reminded us again of the importance and urgency of this goal. I assure you that this crisis would not have occurred had banking union been in place within the eurozone.
Well, last December we approved the design of the single supervisory mechanism and its entry into force in March 2014. This date cannot be put back. First proposal.
The second one : It is urgent to progress in the speedy adoption of the directive on resolution of credit institutions and the system for the direct recapitalisation of banks. Second proposal for June.
Third : by the end of the year we must agree the single resolution mechanism and it is my wish, shared by many others, to agree the basis and dates for a future common deposit guarantee system. A european deposit garantee fund.
With regard to fiscal union, progress has been overly timid. Practically no progress has been achieved in the last year regarding the Road Map proposals.
Some people are afraid that Europe may become a "transfer union" in which the so-called rich countries are forced to use their taxpayers' money to prop up their less wealthy partners.
5-5: Well, let me say two things that, perhaps, may surprise some people. First, for example, Spain's contribution to the bailouts of Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Cyprus is proportionally greater than that of the rich countries, which benefit from lower rates of interest, and so the effort made is significantly less than in our case. Nevertheless, we make this effort because we believe it is essential to support the euro. And secondly, fiscal union is not a question of transfers but one of providing security, so that risks are better covered. It is the smaller countries that have suffered most from this crisis because they had less capacity to deal with financial or fiscal risks. Therefore, we need risk-coverage systems for the whole continent, including some kind of common European debt, and systems to compensate for asymmetric shocks, especially those caused by the differential effects produced by monetary policy.
Another issue. Nor can we set aside the question of economic union. The more integrated our markets, and the more open our economies, the fewer problems we shall have to face, the fewer differential situations to address and the greater the efficiency of our actions. There is a need for more integration in key sectors such as retail banking, services, telecommunications and energy. The European Council meeting last May, on energy and tax fraud, allows me to say that, from time to time, it is advisable to act more forcefully and not remain only in the political momentum.
What I want to say, however, is that where we are taking more resolute steps, in a way that could transform our economies for the better, is in the field of foreign trade.
The possibilities offered by a broad transatlantic pact between the European Union and the United States are enormous. The figures speak for themselves: the EU and the USA are the two largest economies in the world, together accounting for 9% of the world population but 50% of global GDP. An agreement between the USA and the EU would boost economic growth by 2% and could create over two million jobs.
Although there is already a good level of openness in this area, we must set the bar even higher. Therefore, I do not want to take the traditional approach, nor do I seek a routine "free trade association", but rather a highly ambitious approach, sending a clear political signal of our resolve. In this respect, President Obama has a very positive outlook and Europe must not fail to grasp the opportunity offered.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
6-4: Now, I will make a brief comment on political union and I want to start it with a statement : We must think about Treaty amendment as a long term goal. I do not believe that now is the time to engage in the difficult task of its reform. Our citizens would not understand how, just a few years after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, which cost so much effort to achieve, we could embark on further institutional negotiations - these would be very difficult to justify. What they do expect of us are rapid, effective European responses to the crisis and only when we have returned to achieving growth and rising employment can the broader task be addressed, taking into account the necessities of the moment.
I also consider that much more can be done with the existing Treaties. But to do so, all of the Community institutions, starting with the European Council, the Council of Ministers, the Parliament, the Commission and the ECB, must be aware of what our citizens are calling for and must act with all the means available under the current Treaties.
6-3: We must now work to create a genuine economic, monetary, banking and fiscal union, designed and equipped with appropriate instruments to confer democratic legitimacy on the whole project. There must be proper democratic control by the European Parliament and by the national parliaments over the European institutions, and particularly over the European Commission. This is all the more necessary with the advancing transfer of powers and jurisdiction in the framework of fiscal and economic integration.
As we progress toward integration, we shall discover the institutional weak points, those which cannot withstand the pressure of reality. It will be then, after having reconciled the citizens of Europe with the integration project, that we shall again be able to address the question of broad and deep institutional reform, through a Convention in which governments, the Commission and parliaments will all participate.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In another vein, and to takling more specific issues, it is of crucial importance that the European Union sends out messages and takes decisions that are valued in a positive light by its citizens. It must address, and resolve with all the means and instruments at its disposal, the problems that really concern the people of Europe.
Jean Monnet, the great man behind the scenes during those first faltering steps of European union, used to say something that I believe is very apt and that I would like to repeat here today. He said, "We are not bringing together States, we are uniting people". Therefore, I believe there are two issues that we must address immediately, because decisive measures must be taken in order to make a positive impact on growth and employment - which is really what citizens are asking for. And we can so do in the next European Council meeting, next June.
The first of these actions must concern small and medium enterprises. In Europe, there are twenty four million unemployed but there are also twenty four million SMEs. Many proposals has been made and much has been said about this, but I think it is the time to be precise and I am going to be precise. The best way to tackle unemployment is to facilitate funding for projects by SMEs, and to do so, I believe the European Investment Bank can play a major role. A year ago - I want you to notice : a year ago-, we agreed in the European Council to recapitalize the EIB with an extra ten billion euros. This is now taking place but we must use this capital well.
I believe that aid can be channelled to small firms through the EIB by three means and I think it's very important to do so because the institutions have to deal with the real problems, the ones people are suffering the most:
* First proposal : Tripling the annual volume of funds provided, from the present ten billion euros to 30 billion, in order to make a significant impact, Europe-wide.
* Second proposal : Enhancing the capacity of the European Investment Bank to provide commercial banks with high-quality guarantees for portfolios of new loans to small firms, in order to reduce their consumption of capital and to encourage their mobilization in the market through asset securitization backed by a sufficient level of rating. That is, the goal to achieve is to increase lending to SMEs
* Third proposal : Developing a trade facilitation programme to allow European companies to access international calls for tenders and to facilitate export credits. This is very important because now there are European companies which attend biddings outside Europe and can not use the guarantee of a European bank, no matter how important it is. The EIB must take over. And this is something which, incidentally, we are helping to achieve outside Europe with our contributions to development banks but which we do not practice in our own countries.
I believe that with these three proposals, the action of the EIB would be undoubtedly much more useful than it is today for all Europeans
And now I will speak a little, but I'll speak, about the European Central Bank. For its part, the ECB has announced, that it will explore ways to facilitate the flow of credit to SMEs, which is currently blocked due to the fragmentation of financial markets. And I agree. With all respect for its independence, I firmly believe that the European Central Bank can and should do more. On 2 May, President Draghi announced -and well done, at least in my opinion- his wish to initiate what he called an inter-institutional dialogue to address this issue. Well, I believe that this dialogue should begin right now, and I offer him my support for this to be undertaken as soon as possible.
The second of the measures I propose concerns youth employment. I'm also
 going to make two very specific proposals ; only two because I think that, in the end, youth employment is also the result of economic activity, structural reforms, in many things, but today I think we can do two things. This is a key issue.
The first of these, and unquestionably the more important, is to establish a mechanism to temporarily exclude from the national deficit, for the purposes of the excessive deficit procedure,  the cost of exemptions granted from social security contributions when young people are hired. This action, and only this, would enable forceful, immediate action to be taken, providing a real incentive to hire young workers. Because it would lower the social security contributions and, logically, it would facilitate and encourage many companies to hire
The second measure I propose is to speed up the use of the resources that we already have.
Last February, as part of the financial framework of the European Union approved for the next seven years, we set up a six-billion-euro fund to promote youth employment. Listen, I do not think that money has to be spent in seven years, because six billion euros in seven years .... That's fine, but we in Spain, being one of the promoters of this initiative, what we want is for this to be implemented as quickly as possible and also to have these resources available with the utmost rapidity.
I want to say that, from Spain, we also welcome the initiative of Chancellor Merkel to convene a special conference of Labour Ministers, of the 28 Member States, on 3 July in Berlin, in order to study the best and most effective programmes to boost youth employment. This is very important, but it is also very important to take concrete decisions in the European Council in June
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am finishing. These are some of our proposals at the European level. It is this type of European measure, with tangible solutions to the problems that matter most to our citizens, that we must adopt, and quickly, to get back on track with Europe and for Europe to catch up with the growth of the rest of the world. The rapid implementation of the changes agreed, and new reform initiatives: these are the keys to success.
Crisis by crisis, this is how EU history over the past sixty years has been written. If those visionary founders had not had the will and ambition to bring all their projects to fruition, today we would still be talking about coal and steel in the continent.
8-7: I would like to mention an idea that has taken shape in response to the teachings of our own history. When Europe has made decisive progress, it has done so in a step-by-step process, with a precise narrative and with equally specific timeframes. This is how we arrived at the agreement embodied in the Single European Act and this is how we achieved the euro. In both projects the leadership of President Jacques Delors was conclusive. The mandate to President Van Rompuy is oriented in the same direction and Spain supports it with conviction and hope.
If we are to achieve these goals, we must put into practice a quality that Jean Monnet called upon, decades ago: "think like Europeans."
Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen,
On an afternoon like this, over sixty years ago, in this very city of Paris, Robert Schuman set in motion the most beautiful utopia of the twentieth century. We have come far since then and the path ahead is still a long one. But if we pursue the ultimate goal of a "Closer union among Europeans", if we put into practice "de facto solidarity" and if we "think like Europeans", I have no doubt that we will make a reality of the words of Lamartine, who said, "Utopia is nothing but premature truth".
The way forward is to be found in ourselves, in our action and in our ambition. Just three elements are needed: political will, clearly-defined goals and close cooperation. Let us work for this together so that our Utopia may soon become solid reality for all those who live, dream, work and trust in Europe.
Thank you very much.

