Hungary 25 years after the opening of the borders - 25 years of democracy and freedom in Europe
November 11, 2014 4:05 PM
Viktor Orbán's presentation "Hungary 25 years after the opening of the borders - 25 years of democracy and freedom in Europe" delivered at the event organised by the Hanns Seidel Foundation and the Bavarian-Hungarian Forum

6 November 2014, Munich
[part of the speech]
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
http://www.kormany.hu/en/the-prime-minister/the-prime-minister-s-speeches/hungary-25-years-after-the-opening-of-the-borders-25-years-of-democracy-and-freedom-in-europe 

We also believe that we must pursue an entirely different approach across the whole energy sector. I know that this is not possible in Germany, but it is in Hungary. Back home, we do not think of the energy sector as an industry but as a service provision sector - and as a result we are involved in a great many conflicts. What is more, we see it as a non-profit service provision sector which does not exist for the purpose of generating profits, but in order to supply other sectors with cheap energy, enabling them to make a profit. This mentality is completely different from the regulatory system within which we operate in the European Union today. Whether other countries will also be able to adopt this approach is highly doubtful, but the fact remains that the Hungarian model is at the very least worthy of consideration.

1-2: Finally, we must also speak here about the sovereign debt crisis; this strikes us as a highly unfamiliar term, but it merely points to the simple truth that we must not spend money that we have not earned. Ever since our accession to the European Union, we have embraced a dogma centred on the claim that it is possible to build an economy by spending the money first and earning it afterwards. This is an attractive idea, and we would all like it to be possible; however, year after year we have to recognise that such an economy has still yet to be invented. We must therefore work hard first, as we can only distribute that which we have produced; no matter how noble the cause to be financed, we must first generate the funds that we then wish to distribute in our budget. It does not work the other way round. If we do it the other way round, we shall find ourselves in the same position which a number of countries in Europe - together with the Eurozone as a whole - are heading towards: continuously living off credit, consuming our future, and financing our own comfort and convenience with debt to be paid off by our children and grandchildren. This may well be comfortable, but is hardly a morally justifiable attitude, and to make matters worse we can see how the story ends: think about Greece (though I could mention quite a few other countries as well). This is a course that we must not pursue. Hungary has made tremendous efforts to abandon this path because this is the path it followed up until 2010. Few of you may remember, but Greece was not the first Member State in the European Union to buckle financially in response to the crisis; the first was Hungary. In 2008 Hungary was facing collapse, and if the IMF and the European Union had not come to our aid at the time, we could have buried the entire country. It is nothing short of a miracle that we did not in fact go under and that the European Union and the IMF saved us from the worst. We were thereby given time to come up for air, and by 2010 we had got to the point where we were able to keep our mouth and nose above the surface of the water - through enormous effort and sacrifice. Therefore, we must not give up on financial discipline, we must not give up on the just distribution of burdens, and we must not give up on a tax system that serves to boost performance. A tax system that boosts performance means that it primarily motivates those who work. 

We have at this point reached a highly sensitive problem, which is deeply embedded in the European psyche: the approach to the issue of differences in wealth. On a daily basis I can see that the European Union ascribes negative attributes to wealth differences and their increase. However, when you think about it, it is natural that the rewards of those who work - work more, are more talented or are ready to take more risks - should grow faster than those who do not. I am therefore convinced that we must change from a culture of jealousy, a culture of aversion to people who are financially successful, to a culture that acknowledges performance. This will not be easy, particularly for those of us who come from backgrounds in the egalitarian system which was communism; but I am sure that we should see the existing differences in wealth more as a motivating force, rather than some sort of injustice that we seek to eliminate through artificial regulation. I could also express this by saying that for us democracy does not mean a continuation of the class struggle by peaceful means. We do not wish to accept this mentality under any circumstances, as it will result in a declining society with declining performance.

Ladies and Gentlemen, 

These are the six or seven big issues that Europe, and Hungary as part of Europe, are struggling with all at once. What I wish to say - as a kind of summary explanation of the events that are taking place in Hungary - is that it is not enough to answer these questions one by one. It is hardly an easy task to answer these six or seven questions individually; almost no one seems to succeed - Hungary included. But what we have here is an even more difficult task to resolve: once we have the questions and our answers to these questions, we must organise them into a fully operational system. Full employment, the promotion of businesses, the supply of cheap energy, family policy, the reversal of the current demographic trends and a new immigration policy - these must also be arranged and integrated into an operational and logical system. Naturally, this is within the boundaries of a market economy and a democracy, but each country itself must find the answers, and these answers must then be integrated into an operational, viable system. We call this the Hungarian model, which seems to work at this point in time. We ourselves are sometimes surprised, but the situation is that this system works.

2-3: It is widely known in politics that model experiments of this kind are likened to bumblebees. Biologists and physicists have demonstrated that if we measure the various biological features of the bumblebee - such as the size of its abdomen, the span of its wings and the weight of its body - the laws of physics tell us that it should not be able to fly: it should be out of the question. However, bumblebees do fly. The Hungarian model, too, is something like this: on a weekly basis it has been demonstrated that this system, with its combination of individual features, cannot work: it is impossible. But here we are somehow, and even the EU projections released to the public yesterday show that the Hungarian economy will grow by more than 3% this year (three times the average European growth rate), unemployment is continuously decreasing, the country's sovereign debt is falling, and in general in Hungary the indicators which best serve to describe the state of a country are continuously improving. This fills us with great hope, naturally, combined with a degree of modesty; but we may stand before the court of European opinion with sufficient self-confidence and may claim that over several years Hungary has, with careful and laborious effort, developed a set of different answers to the difficult dilemmas arising from EU membership which seem to work for Hungary: the country has done its homework, so to speak. As a source of possible solutions, we respectfully recommend Hungary to the attention of the other Member States of the European Union.

Thank you for your attention.
(Prime Minister's Office)

