Text Nr. 45 (Zurück zur Übersicht)
Titel: Ansprache von Bundeskanzler Gerhard Schröder anlässlich des 4. Forums
"Fazit: Deutschland" am 22. September 1999
Redner(in): Gerhard Schröder
Datum: 22.09.1999
Quelle (nicht mehr verfügbar) :
http://archiv.bundesregierung.de/bpaexport/rede/23/11723/multi.htm
GB
2-6
Firstly, it was necessary, for the years 2000 to 2006, to build the financial architecture of Europe in the truest sense of the word. If that failed, Europe would certainly have found itself in an economic and political crisis. In an economic sense, because after the introduction of a common currency, stagnation in the economy and in other policies of Europe would have catastrophic consequences. In my opinion, many people have been jockeying - and quite rightly so - that the common currency could be the crowning achievement of Europe's political union and, for economic reasons, must be.

2-7
Now the development has been different. But in any case, if we can not bring about more common policies in Europe, the common currency - in the long run anyway - will not be spared crises. That is, the fact that we have a common currency forces us to move towards a political union, or we jeopardize the progress of integration in the single currency itself.


7-2
[Only the one who does it, 1.5 trillion DM debts with 82 billion DM Interest payments every year - 150,000 DM every minute - to reduce to a balanced budget, which, which is the core of the "model Germany", can continue in the future. Otherwise it will not work. The second largest household title after the social budget in Germany is interest, and that is money that we lack to become creative.]
I would never go so far as to say that they were just the others. We worked hard on it. We have - let me put it this way - referring to public sector debt at all levels, thinking too long on a national scale and too little international. The fact that we have a common currency, that low interest rates can only be realized by the ECB when there is budgetary discipline, means that it is now really 5 to 12, if not 12, that policy we are making not because it is an end in itself, but because it is the basis for sustaining the welfare state under radically changed economic conditions.

