
Speech by Federal Chancellor Gerhard Schröder   on the Economic Day 2001 of the Volksbanks and Raiffeisenbanks on 16 October 2001 in Frankfurt / Main:
Date:
October 26, 2001
bulletin
...
5-5:
The scientists, the practitioners who have spoken here, can explain this even better than I do. I want to do it from my point of view. First of all, we can not give up the consolidation policy because it has been agreed internationally. I wonder what would actually happen if just Germany, the strongest economy in Euro pe, would throw the Euro pean Stability and Growth Pact as it were on the dung heap of history. I do not think that would be responsible. That would not be responsible in terms of the partnerships we have entered, but that would be extremely economically wrong, as far as I see it anyway. For the task of the Stability Pact would just not allow the Euro pean Central Bank to make a monetary policy that followed the sensible lines.
 
5-6:
Although I do not want to express myself here about whether the tip of reason has already been achieved in the Euro pean Central Bank. That is something I can not do, for I am , of course, obligedto honor and constantly bow to the independence of the ECB and, of course, I adhere to that, as you will notice. But I think that if we started to give up on the policy of consolidation, it would have a negative impact on the ever-growing rationality of this very independent bank. That's why we can not do it for this reason.
 
5-7:
But I think there is another reason. My view is that if we were to abandon the consolidation policy now, it would have a negative impact on what was being discussed when I arrived, namely the introduction of the euro cash, not on the technical process of introducing the currency, but on it Stability with all the effects it would naturally have psychologically on economic development in Germany, and which would also have for the acceptance of a currency that is emotionally not yet accepted, at least not as we all would like together. The confidence that, if we do it right, the eurojust as stable, if not in perspective can be more stable than in a changing world order, the D-Mark could have ever alone, has not found everywhere sufficiently widespread.
So that's one   second   Argument for not giving up the consolidation policy .
 
...
 
10-1: 
By the way: you have about the introduction of the Euro discussed. All that we can not agree on Euro päisch, is in a so interdependent economy -   Thank God she is so intertwined   - only partially effective. Because of the desired greater integration, we have fewer and fewer opportunities to counteract on a national scale. Finally, you do not just have to say that, you have to grasp it when it's difficult. That's why there can be only one Euro- pegged action if it has to exist. I think the available data wrench to judge that can not be said four weeks after 11.   It takes a little more time to observe and analyze what is really happening.

1


