Vertaling sark 4-12-08

5-4
In total, the effort we make is the measure of the challenge we face. 26 billion, which is 1.3 percentage points of gross domestic product. The budgetary impact itself, in the sense of Maastricht, amounted to € 15.5 billion in 2009. To those who might be concerned about the importance of this additional expense in part financed by a debt addition, I would say first of all that we do not have a choice: to do nothing will cost us much more as it the decision not to rescue our banks
when they were in danger would have been more expensive. If we had done nothing to save our banks, the French would have lost almost all their savings because the entire banking system would have gone bankrupt. If we did nothing to support economic activity and help our businesses, it is their job that the French would lose because bankruptcies and layoffs would multiply. And our public finances would find itself ruined by the collapse in tax revenues and the explosion of spending induced by the rapid rise in unemployment.

6-3
We will have also tp raise the question of the European competition policy that does not allow the European economy a level playing field with the rest of the world where competition may be a means but not an end, even in the most liberal countries. We will have to ask the question of the system of State aid or that of the monopolies. These issues, we are already facing. We can no longer respond after the crisis as we responded to them before. In the meantime, I repeat, the exceptional circumstances call for exceptional measures. Common procedures can not be applied when we must act quickly. The criteria of the Stability Pact on State aid, things start to move. But we must go further and should not be that we ourselves remained motionless on our own rules and that we prevent ourselves to act. the acceleration of events must be matched with accelerated procedures. We can not wait to implement the decisions taken in response to the emergency.
