Vertaling sark 21-10-08

2-2
I said after meeting four: we should gather the Eurogroup countries plus Slovakia which will join us. And this week in addition has allowed us together to find the solution that was to allow banks to do again their business: lending. But we were in a situation where the banks do not lend to each other more, had more money to lend and the entire system was collapsing: the nationalized banks
in the UK failing banks in Belgium, a system outside Europe but so close to Europe, Iceland, crumbling, very bad news in Switzerland, and little by little, contagion: Germany, France, were all swept away. We succeeded in the Eurogroup, to come to an agreement on a huge Plan, 1 800 billion
euros, to enable our financial institutions to do their job and to reassure savers and
European entrepreneurs. 

3-2
We need to carry the idea of ??a new regulation. Europe must offer these ideas and propose them. First, no bank that enjoys money of States could work with tax havens. no
financial institution, Mr. President, can work without being subject to financial regulation. That traders see their compensation package calculated and organized so as not to push
foolish, risk-taking like what we saw. Accounting rules that our banks do not reflect the severity of the crisis, but to enable to support it. That the monetary system is reconsidered between exchange rates fixed. We tried everything in the world. Does the rest of the world have to continue to bear the deficits of the major world power without having a say? The answer is clearly no. It is useless, indeed, to designate a culprit. one merely has to to find the voice and the means to prevent it from happening again. 

5-1
I also want to say one last thing: it is not possible that the euro area continues without
clearly identified economic government. We can not continue like this. I want to pay tribute to
the work of the ECB, I want to express my conviction that the ECB should be independent but for the work of the ECB to find its full potential, it must be able to debate with an economic government. That was the spirit of the Treaty. The spirit of the treaty is dialogue, democracy and mutual independence. And in my mind, moreover, the true economic government of the Euro is a Eurogroup meeting at the level of Heads of State and government. And which it was not a surprise, when I asked for this meeting, to note that for the first time since the creation of the euro it took place. Frankly, when one has a currency, when one gets a Central bank, when one has a single monetary policy and one has no economic government worthy of the name! The effort
was there, Commissioner Almunia, to elect a president, [for the] finance ministers (I participated in the decision, I myself was at the time Minister of Finance), it is a salutary effort and I want to pay tribute to it. Moreover, the work of Jean-Claude Juncker. But I want to say one thing: when the crisis takes the proportions that we have known, only a meeting of finance ministers is not up for the seriousness of the crisis. And when it is necessary to mobilize the money we mobilized, one has not to mobilize the bankers but the Heads of State and Government, the only ones with the democratic legitimacy to take decisions that heavy.

