Appearance before the Plenary Session to report on the conclusions reached at the December 2009 European Council and to outline the priorities of the Spanish Presidencyof the EU Council
Congreso de los Diputados (Madrid), Wednesday 16 December 2009

http://www.lamoncloa.gob.es/lang/en/presidente/intervenciones/Paginas/2009/16122009_CongresoDiputados_ReportOnEUCouncil_SpainsPresidencyObjectives.aspx 
My Right Honourable Friends,
May I inform you about the conclusions reached at the last European Union Council held last 10 and 11 December and explain the priorities of Spain's Presidency of the European Union Council, to take place in the first six months of 2010.
The presidency's agenda will be marked by the application and development of the proposals approved at the last meeting of the European Council, and especially by the unique political moment the EU is going through.
In the last few weeks, we have witnessed historic events. The Lisbon Treaty has come into effect. The appointments of the Permanent President of the Council, Mr Van Rompuy, and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs, Mrs Ashton, have been made. And the President of the Commission, Durao Barroso, has announced his proposals for the composition of a new Commission.
The European project is now entering a new stage in its political history, with a new legal framework and new instruments. A new era is dawning full of expectations that require a strong political commitment.
The last Council took place during this transitional time, still under the Swedish presidency but already with the involvement of President Van Rompuy and the support of the High Representative in the working sessions.
The Council had special relevance for the future implementation of its principal conclusions.
The Council addressed institutional matters related to the full application of the Lisbon Treaty and it analysed the evolution of the economy, finance and the employment situation. It also established the position of the European Union at the Copenhagen conference on climate change and it adopted the Stockholm programme on the development of the European Area of Freedom, Security and Justice in the 2010-2014 period. Additionally, it reiterated the importance of co-operation with eastern countries and the Mediterranean region and statements on Iran and Afghanistan were issued.
As for institutional matters, the Council was very positive about the adoption of basic rules under the Swedish presidency for the application of the Treaty as the internal regulation of the European Council and the preliminary report on the European External Action Service.
It also reiterated the legislation required the launch European External Action Service to be approved during Spain's presidency, before the end of April 2010, and it asked the Commission to present a proposal on the Citizens' Initiative as soon as possible with a view on its passing it in the first six months of 2010.
It is very important for Spain that binding deadlines have been set for the approval of these decisions during our presidency. It is also important that impetus has been given to consultation with the Parliament and the Commission for a Spanish proposal regarding a protocol for the rapid and full incorporation of the additional MEPs envisaged under the Lisbon Treaty. As you know, it entails four additional seats in the case of Spain.
My Right Honourable Friends,
The December Council had a notably economic bias with two central issues: the analysis of the economic and financial situation and the analysis of the structural and contextual measures to exit the crisis. The European position for the Copenhagen summit on climate change was prepared.
We have analysed the extraordinary measures to support the economy and the financial sector implemented by all countries in a co-ordinated way one year ago, which have been crucial to contain the decline in economic activity and to provide stability to the financial system.
The Commission highlighted Spain has been one of the strongest countries in dealing with the crisis in 2009, with a plan that will have a significant impact on economic activity and employment. It took a positive view of our efforts in productive investment positively and highlighted the increase in resources allocated to energy efficiency, expenditure on R&D+i in 2009, and measures to promote innovation in sectors such as the automotive and clean energy industries.
The Council has confirmed the measures adopted by member states as well as by the wider Community have managed to place the European economy on the path to recovery, although we must continue to be prudent about the rate of future growth.
Economic growth still has to consolidate and become strong enough to be able to create employment. It is also important that the financial system is stabilised to allow normal credit flows to companies and households, and that public support measures for economic growth are gradually replaced by private initiatives.
The challenge ahead is designing the withdrawal of budgetary stimulus and support measures for the financial sector, bearing in mind the circumstances of each member state and without putting economic recovery at risk.
Meanwhile, in the European Union we continue to work towards improving financial supervision, which is essential to prevent a repeat of the excesses of the past. The creation of the European System of Financial Supervisors has been agreed for banking, insurance and stock markets. These new authorities, together with the European Systematic Risk Board make up the key pillars of the new supervision framework, which we hope to put in place as soon as possible next year.
The Council has also called upon the International Monetary Fund to consider various instruments to ensure that the financial sector appropriately shares its risks and its profits with society, both in good times and in bad. These instruments could include capital requirements, new tax formulas or even a global tax on financial transactions.
In the area of structural reforms, the Council undertook the New Strategy for Growth and Employment, which must replace the Lisbon Strategy, with the agreement of all heads of state and government so that it is not only an element for transforming Europe's economy in the medium term but also a catalyst to accelerate its current recovery.
Furthermore, the Council has strengthened the EU's position to achieve a global agreement on climate change.
This is a genuine opportunity to move to a new model for sustainable growth, which is less dependent on fossil fuels, based on savings and energy efficiency, low emissions and a high degree of technological innovation. In other words, it is an opportunity that will allow us to recover economic activity and employment.
The EU is going to unveil an important political action in Copenhagen to achieve an ambitious agreement to fight climate change.
The Council confirmed the European Union' commitment to increase its emissions reduction target to 30% by 2020, based on comparable efforts by other countries and it earmarked 7.2 billion euros over the next three years so that developing countries can put climate change initiatives in place as soon as possible.
This is a very significant step, to which Spain will contribute 125 million euros per annum.
My Right Honourable Friends,
In another area, the European Council adopted the Stockholm programme for the development of the European Area of Freedom, Security and Justice during the 2010-2014 period.
This is an important text to strengthen European citizenship, since it consolidates a single space for access to justice. It develops judicial co-operation and the recognition of legal acts. It implements a strategy of internal security, integrated frontier management, and the co-responsibility for European immigration and asylum policies.
Also in this area, the European Council set the objective of approving an action plan under our Presidency to develop the general principles of this program.
In the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Council positively assessed the progress of the EU's Eastern Partnership program with neighbouring countries in Eastern Europe and it highlighted the importance of strengthening dialogue and co-operation with Mediterranean countries, setting up the administrative structure of the Union for the Mediterranean as soon as possible.
The Council also issued a statement on Iran, in which it expressed its concerns about the scope of its nuclear program, as well as warning about eventual new measures if it persists in failing to comply. And a statement on Afghanistan, in which it reiterated the EU's commitment to promote stability in the region and because the Afghan government is finally assuming its responsibility for the security and development of the country.
It gives me special pleasure to inform you that this Council has confirmed the creation of a Forum for Outermost Europe, whose inaugural session will take place during our Presidency, and it will help to strengthen the attention that Europe pays to these regions. In the case of Spain, to the Autonomous Region of the Canary Islands.
My Right Honourable Friends,
Before the start of the European Council, I held a meeting with the Permanent President of the Council, Mr Van Rompuy, and yesterday, as you know, I welcomed him here in Madrid in order to continue our conversations.
On both occasions, I assured him of Spain's utmost support. Together, we have assessed the best way to establish an effective and well-coordinated collaboration during our presidency. And I can assure you that there is a great desire to make decisive progress with the new institutional framework. We are both very aware of the value of setting a strong precedent on this institutional agreement.
We are also very aware of the need to provide the appropriate support and recognition to the High Representative, whom I have also met and with whom I share a desire for mutual collaboration.
My Right Honourable Friends,
I would now like to share with you some reflections on the situation in Europe and on the priorities of the Spanish presidency of the Council of the European Union.
This will be the fourth occasion that Spain has held the Presidency of the European Union. On each of the previous occasions, it faced important challenges. But none, like now, have coincided with a global crisis like the one that is affecting the economy and at a time as strategic as now in the process of European transformation. This gives our Presidency a unique significance and, at the same time, even greater responsibility.
Spain has worked very closely with Belgium and Hungary to prepare a joint program for the next 18 months, in accordance with the Treaty, which was presented to the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs on the 7th and 8th in Brussels.
It has been a very positive experience to give continuity and consistency to the actions of the next three Presidencies.
But it will be our Presidency that must drive forward the project of the new Europe at this time of extraordinary political significance.
How do we see the task ahead? What are the principal challenges to which we have to respond?
We have a strengthened legal framework to launch the Europe that we need. Now we need to apply it with determination and diligence.
At the same time, the experience of this terrible economic and financial crisis shows the need to promote even greater co-ordination of economic policies between the countries of the European Union. To ensure recovery, to promote a new stage of growth, to begin creating employment once again, to maintain high levels of social protection.
Europe is ready to assume greater influence and presence in every geographical and multilateral area of the international stage. It must make progress in unity of action, in exercising our capacity for mediation, in its commitment to the prevention of conflicts and in the fight against poverty and exclusion.
Finally, Europe will only be strong when all its citizens are strong and when European citizens are seen to be strong, which requires new steps to develop and to make the rights of European citizens a reality.
So, these are the four main priorities of our Presidency:
• The first and essential priority for the development of the others is the full and effective application of the Lisbon Treaty.
• The second is to guarantee the economic recovery of Europe through greater co-ordination of every member state and the approval of the European strategy for sustainable growth for 2020.
• The third is to reinforce the presence and influence of the European Union in the new world order.
• Finally, the fourth is to place European citizens at the centre of EU policy, with initiatives designed to develop their rights and freedoms.
My Right Honourable Friends,
Full application of the Treaty is one of our prime objectives and an essential component of our political awareness. With the aid of this Chamber, Spain has always maintained a constructive position in the Treaty negotiation process and now it is our turn to place all our political ability at the service of its application and development.
With the Presidency comes the responsibility for managing the different Council bodies, collaborating with the Permanent Presidency to draw up the Agenda and draft the European Councils' conclusions.
We will take due steps to instigate the regulations necessary to develop the Treaty and, in particular, to establish the European Foreign Action Service.
It is also our goal to consolidate a balanced working format to ensure that the rotating presidencies become an efficient and complementary tool for the new institutions.
My Right Honourable Friends,
The world-wide financial crisis highlighted the need for co-ordination between partners with political authority when applying economic and financial policy.
For many reasons, this co-ordination is even more relevant within the European Union, and the Treaty opens up new channels for improvement in this area.
6-1: co-ordination is, in itself, an essential element for sustainable economic growth in Europe and, as such, it is not merely an option for the future, but rather co-ordination is a necessity. It needs to be intensified to reinforce recovery, manage the strategies designed to overcome the crisis and put into practice progressive withdrawal of the financial sector support and other tax incentives, which will enable us to restore the balance of public accounts. The Member States have taken unprecedented fiscal measures to combat the effects of the crisis. In this respect, I am as convinced that we did what we should have - and when we should have - as I am that we now need to tackle, with all the necessary measures, the fiscal consolidation process that will ensure fulfilment of the Stability and Growth Pact within the established deadlines. Likewise, we are also convinced of the need to continue the reforms that will enable us to successfully face the pending challenges still to come, in order to accelerate recovery and achieve vigourous growth which generates employment.
The first challenge is globalisation itself. The advanced economies, and particularly the European economy, are facing intense competition from the emerging economies, in the area of costs. Europe's response to this should be to improve its capacity to innovate.
Therefore, Spain's Presidency will promote the adoption of an ambitious European Innovation Plan that will cover the different aspects of innovation -regulatory, financial, educational and, of course, the reinforcement of specific policies to support R&D.
The second challenge is climate change: a phenomenon that we can not ignore. Europe is taking the lead in the international arena and has already assumed commitments for emission reductions and the use of renewable energies. We need to take advantage of this transition to a low carbon economy to generate new jobs and additional sources of economic growth.
For this reason, the Spanish Presidency considers it a priority to ensure that the European Union continues to lead the world in the fight against climate change; to do this we will work to make sure that any agreement reached in Copenhagen comes to fruition as soon as possible in a global treaty that will check the increase in CO2 emissions by 2020. Additionally, we will encourage different industrial and technological initiatives to consolidate Europe's leadership as a 'green economy'.
The third challenge is to reinforce our social model in the areas of population ageing and the impact of the crisis , which has been especially noticeable in the labour market, with Spain being one of the worst affected.
A well-trained workforce which is adapted to the new sources of economic growth and which is actively involved in a modern labour market, is a guarantee for sustaining the European social model and the pensions system.
To this end, the Spanish Presidency will promote initiatives to adapt workers skills to the demands of the labour market and improve educational quality, university excellence and continuous training.
The response to these three challenges -economic, environmental and social- will be drawn up within the framework of a common strategy for the transformation of the European Union by 2020.
The New Growth and Employment Strategy, to be approved during the Spanish Presidency, will deal with a limited number of quantitative goals and will establish a shared vision of the European Union's situation from a perspective of productive, environmental and social sustainability.
Finally, the New Strategy should establish a dynamic and operational governance with the participation of all social representatives. All the European institutions need to feel they are active partners in the new strategy and we need to be able to implement a system to survey the results obtained by the governments of the different Member States and the Commission.
In February, under the Spanish Presidency, an informal Council meeting will be held to review the economic situation during which the New Strategy will be examined, prior to approval by the European Council in the spring.
My Right Honourable Friends,
The third priority established for the Presidency, is the goal of reinforcing the European Union's role in the new international arena, as a dynamic partner in the promotion of stability and progress.
The new Treaty and the figures of the President of the Council and the High Representative will enable us to strengthen the image of unity the European Union projects outside beyond its borders, but it is up to all of us to take the decisive step towards an authentic common foreign and defence policy.
Spain accepts this challenge and during our Presidency we will make every effort to ensure that Europe gives out political signals in all areas of its foreign actions that lead to a more extensive and significant presence and greater coherence in its positioning.
We will hold the scheduled multilateral summits with Latin America and the Caribbean and the Union for the Mediterranean, and the bilateral summits with the United States, Russia, Canada, Chile, Egypt, Japan, Morocco, Mexico and Pakistan.
It is essential that relations between Europe and Latin America are given greater political weight and more content. Spain has the role of leading this qualitative advance in the Union's relations with Latin America and we will take advantage of our Presidency to promote the signing of the European Union Association Agreement with Central America and Multipartite Commercial Agreements with countries such as Colombia and Peru, though without renouncing the reactivation of negotiations between the European Union and Mercosur.
We are also going to encourage dialogue and co-operation with South Mediterranean countries, the stability and prosperity of which constitute a priority for Europe. The structure of the Union for the Mediterranean needs to be configured and its General Secretariat set up in Barcelona.
Likewise we propose to contribute towards taking European relations with the United States to the highest level we can hope to within the current historical context. We have in our favour factors such as the improved attitude of the new American government, collaboration with the US in the current economic crisis and a common perception of global challenges.
Additionally, in our opinion, the United States needs to promote a more stable and closer relationship with Russia, through a series of agreements that create confidence and improve the integration of this country as a constructive and reliable partner in the international structure. We will endeavour to achieve significant progress during the summit with Russia on key issues such as energy, security and facilitating mobility.
In Asia, during Spain's Presidency, the summit with Japan will take place. This country is an essential partner for the European Union and a key country for the continent's stability.
Furthermore, our Presidency will develop the Oriental Partnership with countries on the eastern border and will promote stability in the Western Balkans and the perspective of integration into the European Union.
Likewise, we will give special attention to the ongoing accession processes, fostering the progress of negotiation with Turkey and the other candidates. Croatia is expected to finalise its negotiations shortly.
My Right Honourable Friends,
Europe's foreign actions can not be understood without a profound exercise of solidarity with underprivileged peoples and countries. In accordance with the line followed by the Spanish government over the last few years, few will be surprised to see Spain ensuring the fulfilment, throughout its Presidency, of all the international commitments in the fight against hunger and poverty on the way to reaching the Millennium Development Objectives.
My Right Honourable Friends,
Our fourth challenge will be the policies for citizens, the policies promoting rights.
We aspire to have a European Union in which the values of freedom, justice, solidarity and equality become positive rights for our citizens and in which, day by day, they are exercised more extensively, more in line with the new social contexts and more efficient in providing guarantees.
We want Europeans to feel that the Union is a positive benchmark for their daily lives and for them to participate actively in this common project.
To this end, the Presidency will promote initiatives that strengthen and guarantee the exercising of the rights contained in the Union's Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Likewise, our Presidency will encourage the adoption of a proposal to regulate the Citizens' Initiative, envisaged by the Treaty, and will open a new channel for citizens to participate in the Union's legislative process.
Effective equality between men and women is one of our internal priorities and it will also be a priority during our Presidency. For this purpose we will support the preparation of a Plan for Equal Opportunities for Men and Women for the 2011-2015 period, with special emphasis on labour issues.
Another key objective will be to continue the fight in favour of eradicating all forms of gender-based violence. We will propose two initiatives: the creation of a European Gender-Based Violence Monitoring Centre and the promulgation of a European Protection Order, which will extend the security measures adopted by the judicial entities in any Member State to the entire European territory.
We will also initiate the process for the European Union's accession to the Convention on Human Rights, and we will approve the Stockholm Programme Action Plan for the European Area of Freedom, Security and Justice, with measures that, as already mentioned, will have a considerable positive effect on the security of our citizens.
My Right Honourable Friends,
We know that dealing with immigration is one of Europe's greatest challenges. We, who have contributed to the content of European policy on immigration over the last few years, are well aware of the situation.
Now we will deal with it in its different aspects, from integration and co-operation with the countries of origin and transit, to the tireless fight against the mafias that exploit the desperation of the less fortunate.
My Right Honourable Friends, the four pillars of Spain's Presidency will be: faithful and determined application of the new Treaty; greater co-ordination of economic policy to reinforce recovery and establish the basis for sustainable European growth; strengthening of the Union as a decisive political partner in globalisation, and continuous attention to European citizens and their rights in all the new initiatives.
These four priorities are in harmony with the convictions of the great majority of our fellow countrymen and woman represented by the groups in this Chamber; four great goals to advance towards as Europeans and as Spaniards; four aspirations that are undoubtedly demanding, but no more demanding than the moment the Union itself is going through.
To deal with these four priorities, today I ask, once again, for your collaboration. The Presidency of the Union is, unequivocally, a task for the whole country, and it is with this conviction that the government faces it and takes it on.
Thank you.

