Vertaling Sark 5-5-09

4-1
The need for State, the demand for social protection, the need for regulation of global finance and globalization, the need to build a new world economic and monetary policy, the demands of justice, all the brings back ideas, the values ??of Europe to the foreground. It is still necessary that one assumes them. To the question that so long accompanied the decline of Europe, "What can Europe do? "France replied with another question," What Europe wants to do? "When we do not want anything, we can do nothing.

5-3
The Europe that acts the Europe that exists the Europe that is able to make itself be heard, to put forward its point of view, this is the one that has been able to gather all heads of state and government the euro area with the President of the European Commission and the President of the European Central Bank, to discuss together, work together, decide together as it had never done before, because it was not in habits, was not in the procedures.

5-6
In the world as it is, Europe can not do without a economic policy. It is not reasonable that countries whose economies are so closely related and share the same currency do not have a coordinated economic policy that may not be reduced to an inflation target and compliance with the criteria of the stability Pact

5-7
The banking crisis has shown how a dialogue between the Central Bank and the Member States would be useful without at any time the independence of the European Central Bank to have been the least challenged. It showed that one was unable to govern the European economy only with accounting criteria. The crisis has increased deficits because it has reduced revenues and increased spending and because, given the recession, raising taxes would have been madness. The crisis does not only requires us to make the assessment of the situation
exceptional. It gives us the opportunity and it requires us to go further in thinking about economic policy as in competition policy.

6-1
Europe, preparing for the future, needs to invest. You can not borrow to consume indefinitely without running straight into bankruptcy. But it is reasonable to invest or borrow to buy assets when their price is low.

6-2 [doorloop]
When the state lends capital to banks so they can in turn distribute more credit, the state makes money. When the state lends to car manufacturers so they can meet their cash needs, the state makes money. When the state invests in a Strategic Investment Fund to enable our businesses to grow and to make them safe from predators, the state can expect to earn money. When the government borrows to invest in research and infrastructure, it is hoped its debt through additional revenue. When the state invests in reform that will spend less in the future, guarantee the repayment of the debt on future savings.

6-3 [doorloop]
When you make the choice of recovery through investment, we increase the deficit but is preparing for the future. You can not look at the amount of the deficit without looking at what it funds. We can not settle for an accounting approach without looking at economic policy. The consolidation of public finances passes through savings on unnecessary expenses. It also passes through improving the productivity, competitiveness, through the rehabilitation of work, by encouraging entrepreneurship.

6-5
I say to the the French, we can not expect tomorrow, when the crisis is over, to have more growth, more jobs, more purchasing power, if the work is more taxed in France than elsewhere in Europe, if our households and businesses pay more taxes, more charges than they pay in other European countries. You can not want to make Europe, have the capital, men, goods circulate freely and at the same time raise taxes. You can not want to make Europe and deny the tax shield (debt brake) that Germany has included in its Constitution. When you are in Europe, when you have the harvesting level that we have reached, we do not raise taxes, we lower them!

6-7
France will fight for all the achievements of European integration, to bring the single market, to put the euro in the service of growth, in servic of employment.

7-1
We need debates on monetary policy. We need debates on fiscal policy.

