Transcript of a press conference given by Prime Minister David Cameron and the Danish Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen in London on 12 August 2010.
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/press-conference-with-the-danish-prime-minister 
Prime Minister
Well, good morning, everyone.  Thank you for coming and a very warm welcome to Prime Minister Rasmussen from our very close ally Denmark.  We've had an excellent meeting this morning and a meeting where we were able to refresh and renew the very strong relationship that Britain and Denmark have.  We are extraordinarily close allies and close friends and have a shared outlook on so many of Europe and the world's problems and it's been good to discuss those and to discuss our common approach.
1-2: We're very strong allies within the European Union where we both want to see strong deficit reduction, which your country is doing and my country is doing.  We both want to press for free trade, for open markets, for deregulation, for a Europe that actually works for all our people and to get European growth rates up.  That's a very strong shared interest that we have.  And as we reduce our deficits at home, I think it's very important, as we were discussing, that we both argue to make sure that the European budget over time is reduced rather than increased.  We cannot ask our members of the public to pay more here in the UK and have to pay more in Europe as well.  So we're strong allies in Europe and we're going to work together at these important European Council meetings coming up this autumn.
But above all, we are strong allies in NATO and very strong allies in Afghanistan where our troops have fought together, have suffered together and sometimes, tragically, have died together.  And I know some of your brave servicemen are being repatriated through RAF Brize Norton, which is in my constituency in Oxford, today.  And one of the things that always strikes me when I go to Afghanistan and talk to our military commanders is how they pay tribute to the incredible bravery and dedication of Danish soldiers and how they admire your soldiers and they like working with them.  They enjoy fighting and working with them in what we're doing in Afghanistan.
And Prime Minister Rasmussen and I share the same goal in Afghanistan, which is that we want to build up the Afghan army, the Afghan police.  We want the Afghans to be able to take control of their own security and that will be the best way to enable our forces to come home with their heads held high that we've done an important job of enhancing security and safety in that country.  That is why we're there, that is what we want to do to make sure that the terrorist threat that we face in our own countries is reduced by having a strong and a stable Afghanistan.
We had a very good meeting today.  We're going to be meeting quite often in the autumn with these European Councils coming up in September, October and December.  And we have something else in common, which is the Danish Prime Minister had part of his holiday here in the UK and I'm about to have my holiday here in the United Kingdom, although your feat of cycling 200 kilometres in one day is not something I'm planning to match.  I am no match for the Danish Prime Minister on a bicycle, but it's great to have you here, you're very welcome.  Prime Minister.


1


