The Prime Minister has given a joint press conference with the President of the European Council Herman van Rompuy at Downing Street on Tuesday, 19 January 2010.
http://sfm2020.btdtbtt.com/Speechesview.asp?showdetail=&ID=14794 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown
Can I say, first of all, I'm very glad to be able to welcome to London, on his first visit as President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy. We've had a very good meeting. We have talked to leading business leaders in the United Kingdom. We are publishing today, as the British government, our compact for jobs and growth. Mr Van Rompuy has also met our Business Secretary and the Chancellor of the Exchequer to discuss the economic prospects for Europe in the months ahead.
I wanted, however, to start, as President Van Rompuy will as well, our thoughts and prayers are, first and foremost, with the people of Haiti. Yesterday, Britain announced a contribution of €30 million in total, with Europe also announcing that in total their amounts of money that they will provide for Haiti of €400 million, much of that to go to immediate aid. People across Britain and Europe have showed enormous generosity. Now, in the coming hours and days, we must continue to improve our effort at rescuing the people of Haiti and beginning the reconstruction of this troubled and fated country.
No one can fail to be moved by the scenes that we are now seeing from Haiti and no one can fail to be moved to action and this is now a test of the international community. It is a test of our compassion, it is a test of our resolve and it is also a test of our ability to coordinate our actions together. It must not be beyond our ability, working together, to make sure that we can rescue as many people possible, bring services back to the people of Haiti and begin the reconstruction of a country that for too long has been immersed in poverty and now in tragedy. We will be doing everything we can to ensure that the compassion that is being shown by the British people and from people all over the world is matched by the coordination internationally of the effort to help the Haitian people.
2-1: Now, today, we've discussed, as I said, the priorities for Europe as we move forward: how we combat climate change, how we provide security for our citizens against terrorism and how in the context of sustainable public finances we take urgent action on our economy. And I think President Van Rompuy and I agree that at this critical point in Europe's history we must now more than ever raise our level of ambition for Europe's future growth and employment. The European Union, despite the challenge of Asia and the rest of the world, remains the world's largest trading block. We are the biggest export market in the world. We are the largest internal market in the world and we have to forge a new economic strategy for our future following the financial crisis.
2-2: Today, there are 23.9 million men and women unemployed in Europe. Unemployment is at 10%. It is unacceptably high and we have to take action to deal with that. The European Union met last year to coordinate measures to tackle the recession and just as the G20 came together to fight back so too the European Union came together to fight back. Now, as we approach an important conference on February 11th, we must agree coordinated measures in Europe that will build a strong recovery. Growth at 0.7% for 2010, the projected European growth figure, is low. Year to year growth expected in Europe in the years to come is also too low. The European growth ambition is not good enough for the future, so at that meeting we and other countries will be proposing a growth and jobs strategy designed to raise European levels of growth and, consistent with sustainable finances, create new opportunities for jobs across the continent. And it is these proposals that we are publishing today.
First, Europe must be in the global vanguard of tomorrow's industries: broadband, digital, pharmaceuticals, scientific cooperation, space technology, leading in infrastructure and the networks that can bring about prosperity for Europe and the world. We want the European Investment Fund to be in a position to access capital markets and lever in substantial extra private funding for investment in technology companies of the future. We also believe that Europe's state aid rules and public procurement practices and the European budget should be reviewed and reformed to support the challenge and the needs of industries of the future.
We also believe, as President Van Rompuy has made clear, that Europe should lead the world as we seek to cap carbon emissions and reduce damaging climate change and that we should continue to do so; and this is also a framework for developing the new low carbon economy. So we are proposing to reprioritise funds from the European Social Fund and Investment Bank to up skill workforces for the low carbon economy, new innovative finance vehicles to help deliver 50 billions of investment in strategic energy technologies over 10 years and, in addition, to establishing renewable energy centres within the European Institute of Technology and research framework programmes. So we are proposing very big investment in the low carbon economy of the future.
We are proposing that we take forward our ambition for open markets, the completion of the single market, and the creation of more flexible labour markets. And, at the same time, if the Doha round remains stalled on trade, we need to ensure that Europe develops free trade agreements with other regions and countries, starting with Korea. And we are also proposing an annual economic summit in Europe in which we would measure the objectives we have set and see that we have made progress in creating both jobs and growth.
Half of Britain's international trade is with the European Union. More than three million of our jobs depend on Europe. The opportunity for Britain in Europe is real, it's pressing and it's essential and we thrive being at the heart of a strong and prosperous Europe. And if Europe can take the measures that we are suggesting and raise its labour force participation by just 5% that would create 15 million jobs, raise European output by 4%, create €0.5 trillion of additional wealth, create large numbers of apprenticeships and jobs for young people in particular, and tackle the unemployment problem that we face. We must deliver this economic step change.
We are putting these proposals to the summit on February 11th, but we know that you too, President Rompuy, have proposals that you wish to put to the summit that would mean higher growth in Europe in the years to come.

1


