Prime Minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen's speech to the closing ceremony at the European University Association's Annual Meeting and 10th anniversary meeting at Aarhus University 15 April 2011
http://www.stm.dk/_p_13412.html 
Check against delivery

President of the European University Assosiation, rectors and university leaders, other distinguished guests.
First of all, thank you José Manuel for your excellent speech.
I would also like to offer my congratulations to the European University Association on it's 10th anniversary.
I am proud that you have chosen to have this conference here at Aarhus University.
* * *
We all share a vision for Europe. A vision of Europe as a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy delivering high levels of employment, productivity and social cohesion. And as President of the European Commission you, José Manuel, play a very important role in this work.
To fulfill this vision we need excellent European universities, which will make Europe an attractive destination for the best researchers and the best students in the world. However, in Europe, as in the rest of the world, we face fundamental economic challenges. The economic recovery is gaining ground, but most European countries are still experiencing growth rates that fall well below the levels in Asia and other emerging economic centers.
2-2: After the international economic crisis we face a serious growth challenge - and at the same time the challenge of consolidating our public finances. The answer to both challenges is forward-looking reforms. To enhance growth we must invest in research, development and education. We must secure excellent universities. But we also need the money before spending them. Therefore we need reforms. To improve our long-term growth potential and to secure sound public finances.
In this week the Danish Government has put forward a Reform Plan which implies fiscal balance in 2020:
We will phase out our voluntary early retirement pension scheme in order to raise the work supply. We will use our state education grant scheme more proactively to encourage students to complete their studies and start working. 
We will reform disability pensions and flexi-job schemes.
Also, we will reform our Primary school system to ensure better results through clear national goals and more freedom to schools and teachers. 
And we will increase competition in different sectors and improve public-private cooperation in delivering welfare services.
The Reform plan creates room for giving special priority to health, education and research without having to cut core welfare services.
And the Reform Plan ensures that we can maintain the Barcelona target of public allocations to research and development of 1 per cent of GDP also in the future.
I am confident that this Reform Plan will contribute to making Danish universities attractive for the best researchers and students of the world.
* * *
