Speech by the President of the Government at the Plenary Session of the Lower House of Parliament to report on the European Council meeting held on 18 and 19 October
Lower House of Parliament, Madrid, Wednesday 31 October 2012

http://www.lamoncloa.gob.es/lang/en/presidente/intervenciones/Paginas/2012/20121031_PG_Speech_AfterEUCouncil.aspx 
Mr. Speaker, honourable members of the House,
The purpose of my speech to the Plenary Session of this House is to inform you all about the European Council meeting that was held in Brussels on 18 and 19 October.
Allow me, ladies and gentlemen, to start by mentioning the European Council agreement in which we expressed our gratitude to the Nobel Committee in Oslo for awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to the European Union.
In these times of economic uncertainty, it is only normal that certain sceptical reactions will emerge regarding the future of the European Union. For that very reason, I believe it appropriate to highlight this specific moment in time, step back a little and take a look at the slightly bigger picture.
The Treaty of Rome, in 1957, formalised the birth of the Common Market; the origins of the current European Union. 55 years have passed since then. I suggest you think about the following: go back 55 years before that milestone moment in history and you will find yourselves at the start of the 20th Century. During the first half of the last century, Europe became embroiled in two extremely vicious battles that, despite being called World Wars, could also have been referred to as European Civil Wars.
The European Union has contributed many things to the process of peace and freedom around the world but this Nobel Peace Prize is well deserved if only for not having returned once again to those tragic situations of war between European states that have stained our history. And today, as scepticism invades so many spaces, the memory brought to us by this Prize should help us to maintain and uphold all the efforts necessary to keep the European Union process alive and kicking.
Honourable Members,
Let us now move on and examine the European Council that was held on 18 and 19 October.
In order to properly assess the issues discussed at this Council meeting, I consider it necessary to put certain things into context.
1-6: Europe is currently experiencing its fifth year of economic crisis; a crisis that, for reasons you are all very much aware of, has affected Spain to a very considerable degree. Economies like ours, which have been subject to less than rigorous fiscal policy for so many years and that have been left behind in the process of reform, are now suffering considerably from the painful effects of this crisis.
2-1: On repeated occasions, before and since I took office as President of the Government, you have all heard me argue the fact that, in order to return to the path of sustainable and stable growth with jobs being created, there are things we - the people of Spain - need to do, and things that need to be done in conjunction with our partners in the European Union: we need to restore rigor to our management of fiscal affairs and undertake structural reforms that will enable us to both improve our competitiveness and increase the flexibility of our economy; the European Union as a whole needs to implement measures to foster growth on the one hand and ensure the necessary stability and confidence on the other, in such a way that the fiscal consolidation and reforms can produce results.
2-2: We will not recover from this crisis without putting our own house in order, however painful that may be. But strict compliance with our obligations alone would not guarantee us a return to the path of economic growth and job creation. We must be very aware that, in order to meet the targets we have set ourselves, it is essential for the European framework in which we operate to collaborate on the process.
Honourable Members,
2-3: As you will recall, we took some important steps at the previous European Council meeting on 28 and 29 June to promote a raft of substantial changes for the future of the European Union. Issues that were related to economic growth and job creation, measures to foster greater stability in the short term and open a debate on the future of the Euro; the latter being highly necessary in my opinion.
The objective of this most recent Council meeting, on 18 and 19 October, was to move forward on the debate and on the conclusions approved in June in order to be ready to take decisions for the future of the European Union at the next Summit in December. It could be said that this Council meeting was a bridge enabling ideas to take hold between one Summit and the next one.
From that point of view, the objectives were achieved. The result of this Council meeting was progress on the result in June and, with that, we have sent a very important message of unity and determination on the process of European integration. We set the course for the European process in June. The agreements adopted at this Council meeting mean that course has not only been maintained but also strengthened and further developed.
2-6: I believe this should be a source of satisfaction for everyone. We are meeting our commitments and thus offering the people of Europe and the rest of the world credibility and confidence. That is good for our recovery from the crisis and for guaranteeing the European project.
At a time when the situation in Europe remains delicate, one wrong move could have led to a new wave of instability. That has not been the case. We have shown that, with commitment from the European institutions and the Member States, we can produce such specific results as those achieved at this Summit. I believe we have fulfilled expectations this time and that the results from this Summit can be described as positive for both the European Union and Spain.
2-8: This was made possible by the excellent preliminary work carried out by the European institutions, embodied by a report on the future of the Economic and Monetary Union that was drafted by the Presidents of the Council, the Commission, the Parliament and the Eurogroup. Of course, I refer to the so-called "Four Presidents Paper", which was commissioned by the Summit of Heads of State and Government in June.
The report provides a solid starting point for defining the path towards greater and more solid economic and political integration in the Eurozone. That document was discussed at great lengths by the Heads of State and Government during this Council meeting so that we can be in a position in December to define a "road map" for strengthening the economic framework of the Euro.
3-2: Spain has actively participated in the process of drafting this intermediate report and presented specific proposals for greater banking and fiscal integration, which were very much welcomed by the institutions and by many of our partners. To a great extent, our proposals have been included in the document that served as the basis for the discussions.
3-3: In other words, the Government of Spain, as it is in our country, is also a reformer in Europe. We are convinced this is the best option for our citizens. And now, Honourable Members, allow me to summarise the most important points to arise from the European Council meeting in October. 
The first relates to the number of countries involved in the agreements. As you will remember, the agreements at the Summit in June were adopted by the sixteen Member States that comprise the Eurozone. The commitments at this latest Summit were accepted by the entire European Union, all twenty-seven countries. This will make things much easier moving forward. As regards the "banking union", the Commission has now presented the proposal to which it committed itself in June. It is a good proposal that enables progress on sole supervision with an efficient model. Some of us would have preferred a quicker process in this regard but we have to admit that the existence of a specific proposal is an undeniable step forward.
Furthermore, where our commitment in June was only to study that proposal by the end of the year, we made considerable progress at the Council in October by agreeing its approval this year and its application during 2013, as was requested by the President of the European Central Bank, Mr. Draghi.
In addition, it was also agreed for the European Central Bank to become the supervisory institution; something that had not been agreed on in June.
In short, I am relatively satisfied with the results on banking union because these agreements contain a large part of the proposals we made at the time to President Van Rompuy. For now, the sole supervision process is being developed and is expected to be approved in December. As regards the deposit guarantee fund and a system for winding up European entities, progress will be made during a second stage, as reflected in the Conclusions.
3-4: I will now move on to talk about the "direct recapitalisation of the banks". This was merely a possibility in June and has now been further developed as we commissioned the Eurogroup to define the specific ways in which this will be carried out. I know that this issue has awoken great interest and expectation. That is to be expected because it is undeniably an important issue. If we can agree on this issue, a clear message of confidence in our common currency, the Euro, will be sent to the world. That will be beneficial for all Member States but, in the current situation, especially for Spain.
It should not be forgotten at this point that the result from the strict independent assessment of the Spanish banking system revealed that its recapitalisation requirements are valued at approximately forty billion euros. In other words, that, although being important to make progress in 2013 on direct recapitalisation, this issue is less pressing that it was in June, at which time we still did not know the result from that assessment of our financial system.
4-2: The next conclusion relates to the "economic and fiscal union". It will not have escaped any of you that this is an issue on which there is a wide variety of opinions, even contradictory, among the various Member States. I need not remind you that the non-Eurozone Member States of the European Union have adopted a well-defined position on this issue that is not exactly in line with the position we are defending. In spite of that, we did make an important step forward: defining what we all consider to be Fiscal Union.
4-3: On this point, the proposal by the "four Presidents" (in line with the Spanish proposal in many regards) was a good benchmark and its basic concepts were incorporated in the Conclusions from the Council. Especially important is the idea that the Eurozone should have its own fiscal powers. That means nothing more and nothing less than the fact we are discussing the creation of a true Eurozone Budget and an integrated fiscal policy.
In short, progress was also made in terms of "fiscal union". We still need to further develop many things at the European Council in December, above all a clear "road map", but there is already a firm commitment to do so in the Conclusions from this Council. And that, from where I'm standing, is positive.
As regards the "Growth and Employment Pact", progress is being made on several issues. For us, and as I have already defended before this house, the most important issues are those that relate to the financing of the economy, our SMEs in particular, and the internal market, especially in terms of energy and trade.
However, I believe that we need to go much further in terms of economic growth. Allow me to briefly speak about the ideas I defended while speaking with my European colleagues.
After five years of crisis and in spite of the efforts we have made, Europe is still in recession. The latest forecasts, those made by the International Monetary Fund, reflect a decline in the Gross Domestic Product of the Eurozone of 0.4% for 2012 and only slight growth of 0.2% for 2013. The most vulnerable countries are showing significant falls in Gross Domestic Product but even the most resilient economies are showing very stunted growth.
This lack of growth in Europe will be accompanied by a strong segmentation of the markets. Lack of growth and segmentation are very closely related and we must break that vicious circle.
4-5: I am convinced that the economic policy of all Member States should focus on two basic core issues: on the one hand, the sustainability of public finances (essential for guaranteeing the credibility of the single currency); and, on the other hand, the implementation of far-reaching structural reforms that can increase the flexibility and enhance the competitiveness of our economies; and, for the entire Eurozone, greater integration that will consist of banking, fiscal, economic and political union. I am absolutely convinced that, in order to be successful, the consolidation targets and structural reforms must be well defined, realistic, well executed and all form part of a clear, forward-thinking project. Only that will enable Europe to regain the confidence necessary to generate growth. These are the aspects that the European economic policy must have in order for a recovery from the current situation to take place: consolidation that is ambitious as it is realistic, far-reaching and long-lasting structural reforms and, no less important, a sound and comprehensive integration project. And that is what I am defending in Europe.
Honourable Members,
As I said at the beginning, the European Union, which is a space of peace and security, is taking appropriate action in the development of its international policy. In this regard, this latest European Council focussed on three main issues.
The crisis in Syria unfortunately continues, worsening day by day on the ground and further deepening the humanitarian crisis in the country. In this regard, we reiterated our call for the parties involved to cease the violence and protect the most vulnerable groups. Furthermore, the European Union maintains its firm position in condemnation of President Bashar al-Assad, strengthening the sanctions against his political regime. At the same time, we will make efforts to facilitate humanitarian aid activities. We will continue working at the United Nations and backing the mission undertaken by the joint United Nations and Arab League envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and his search for a peaceful solution to the crisis that can lead to a political transition in the country. In order to guarantee that transition, we will continue supporting the Syrian opposition so that it may achieve cohesion, strength and constitute a real alternative for building the Syria of the future.
Finally, we expressed our deep concerns over any possible contagion to neighbouring countries, especially Turkey. In this regard, we strongly condemned the recent Syrian aggression against Turkish territory.
Iran continues with its nuclear programme, violating its international obligations and without cooperating with the International Atomic Energy Organisation. It is therefore necessary to continue, and that was the agreement, with the dual process of negotiations and sanctions, which we have strengthened. This policy is starting to produce results, seeking to bring Iran to the negotiating table with real content that can enable a diplomatic solution to the situation.
Terrorist groups in Mali, allied with the Al Qaeda of the Islamic Maghreb, are in control of the northern half of the country due to the impotence of the unorganised and weak national army. From that region, they are trafficking weapons, drugs and people, they stone women believed to have committed adultery, they plan and carry out kidnappings and attacks against western citizens, they train terrorists from all corners of the globe and destabilise the governments in neighbouring countries. This is an immediate threat to Mali, the region and Europe.
The Government of Mali has requested assistance from the United Nations Security Council, which, in its Resolution 2071 of 12 October, invited the European Union and others to provide assistance and training to the Armed and Security Forces of Mali.
The European Council studied this request for assistance from Mali and the United Nations, and agreed to accelerate the planning of a possible military operation under the Common Security and Defence Policy. This operation would be aimed at helping the Armed Forces of Mali reorganise and train so that they may restore the Rule of Law and re-establish a fully democratic sovereign government with authority throughout Mali.
Furthermore, the Council decided to strengthen its humanitarian response and gradually resume its cooperation for development as constitutional order is restored. A democratic Mali is the final goal, one that can recover its territorial integrity and offer its citizens a future of peace and development.
I am nearing the end now, Honourable Members,
The European Union is moving, albeit at a pace that some of us may think is desperately slow. At the Session held in this House on 11 July to report on the previous European Council meeting, I literally said: "Honourable Members, Time, both in politics and in economics, is always an important variable, but at a moment of uncertainty in the markets and doubt as to Monetary Union, it becomes a critical variable. Hence the importance of all aspects which will help not only dispel the current uncertainties, but also clear the way for decisions to be taken. The aim is to ensure that between the political decision and its application, there is no time lag which could ultimately undermine the purpose of political agreement at the highest level."
Those words would have the same value today but, in spite of all the concerns, and paraphrasing Galileo Galilei, it could be said that: "and yet, it moves".
6-2: Europe is moving and Spain, as far as it possibly can, continues to support the entire process of reforms and consolidation in the European Union. First came "the five points", to which I have referred on many occasions in this House and which I passed on to both our European partners and the European institutions; then came the commitment from the European Council in June; then came the Spanish proposals for Banking Union and Fiscal Union, which are well reflected in the "Four Presidents Paper"; and, finally, this Council of twenty-seven, at which progress we have always defended was agreed upon.
6-3: We will apply the same determination with which we are undertaking the fiscal consolidation and reforms needed by the Spanish economy to ensure the European process does not falter. As I said before, overcoming this crisis must involve national reforms but must also involve reforms at a European level, and I believe that we took another step in that direction at the European Council meeting in October.
Honourable Members,
The important thing when setting a course is to stick to it. That is what we did at this Council. Therefore, the European project has more credibility and confidence today. It is my desire and my intention, and I hope I share this with all of you here, that this line is maintained for the extremely important debate at the European Council meeting in December. That is what we are working towards.
That is all. Thank you very much for your attention.

