





  
México City, Four Seasons Hotel, 15 oktober 2013 - Klaas Knot heeft op een conferentie van  de Banco de México ter gelegenheid van de 20ste verjaardag van de onafhankelijkheid van  deze instelling gesproken. Hij besteedde in zijn speech ruim aandacht aan het belang van  onafhankelijkheid van centrale banken in het algemeen, en die van de ECB in het bijzonder.  Hij ging daarbij niet voorbij aan de kritiek waaraan juist die onafhankelijkheid blootstond  vanwege het onconventionele monetaire beleid dat  de ECB in de afgelopen jaren had  gevoerd.   
Zie onder voor de volledige speech1:   
  
Ladies and gentlemen,   

It's a great pleasure for me to have been invited to speak at this conference of the  Banco de México.   
Especially so as this event marks the 20th anniversary of its autonomy.   
And I gladly congratulate the Banco de México on this important milestone.   
The topic of this Conference - central bank independence: progress and challenges  - is very well chosen, I would say.  

1-2: For from the dawn of the financial crisis, back in the summer of 2007, the role of  central banks and particularly the relationship with governments has been  controversial.   In light of the theme of this session, my remarks will focus on one of the most  independent central banks of the world, the ECB.   I do so as the ECB's unconventional actions have also sparked intense debate about  its independence.   The main question is how the ECB should respond to today's complex and  challenging environment in which its independence sometimes seems to be at risk.   I would like to start off my remarks by reminding people of the long-standing wisdom  that it is imperative to protect central bank independence.  Already in the early 19th century, the economic theorist David Ricardo explained why  it wasn't a good idea to entrust governments with the power to issue paper money.   For governments, he argued, would almost certainly abuse this power.  For instance, if circumstances compelled them to create money, such as at times of  war.   Instead, Ricardo reasoned, central banks must be governed by individuals who  should be "entirely independent" of the government, and who "should never, on any  pretence, lend money to the Government, nor be in the slightest degree under its  control or influence".2   



1  




2-1: Clearly, Ricardo's original ideas are still valid today, for most of the world's major  central banks enjoy a substantial degree of independence.   In fact, it is generally undisputed that central bank independence is the way to protect  governments against the temptation to misuse monetary policy for short-term goals,  for example, by creating sudden inflation to ease budget pressures.  By granting monetary policy to the discretion of an independent central bank, the  focus can be on long-run stability.3   
Research has also shown that independence enables central banks to run more  credible monetary policy, making it "easier" to achieve their goals.4   A final merit of central bank independence, especially relevant in the current juncture,  is the scope it creates for unorthodox measures during crisis periods.   In fact, the greater a central bank's independence and credibility in normal times, the  greater its flexibility and credibility to engage in unconventional monetary policy  during critical times.  Thus, during crises, an independent central bank has much more flexibility to take  actions that might otherwise fuel inflationary fears.5  

2-2: This brings me to the essence of this session.   Much of the current controversy surrounding central bank independence is related  with central banks' ability to engage in unconventional monetary policy.   As many have argued, their large-scale purchases of financial assets and other  unorthodox measures have taken central banks into "uncharted waters"6 and  explicitly challenged the notion of central bank independence.   The unprecedented expansion of central banks' balance sheets since the start of the  crisis is certainly revealing.   It shows that central banks' balance sheets are becoming more and more exposed to  economic risk and political pressure.   Eventually, this may result in a substantial amount of negative capital in a central  bank's balance sheet.   This is undesirable, because it could undermine a central bank's credibility and  independence.   On the one hand, a government guarantee to cover potential losses would protect a  central bank's financial position.   But, if the government has to invoke this guarantee, the fiscal dimension of the  monetary policy becomes very visible, and the previously solid line between fiscal  and monetary policy will be blurred.   

An additional concern for central banks is that unconventional monetary policy  increasingly comes with some sense of "public unease" about the role central banks  play.   

While the majority of the public doesn't understand the way central banks operate,  many consider central banks at the same time as the only player with room for  maneuver.   


2  




The fact that criticism of central banks is creeping more and more into the  
mainstream debate - whether or not this is justified - implies that the public is looking  increasingly critically at central banks.   
While this may not put central bank independence or central banks' room for  
maneuver immediately at risk, it does signify that central banks may need to step up  their efforts on transparency and accountability. This is a topic I will return to later.     

Now I would like to turn to how central banks should operate in this more complex  and challenging environment with a particular focus on the ECB?   

3-1: In my view, there are six points of special interest for the ECB, which I will deal with  in the remainder of my remarks.   To start with, it is imperative that the ECB sticks to its mandate to maintain price  stability over the medium term. This, despite the many calls to widen its mandate to  explicitly include financial stability considerations and/or domestic employment goals.   In theory, delegation of a task to an independent authority is more acceptable  > when the delegated task is clearly specified and has no overlap with other policy       tasks;   > when there are relatively few distributional implications;   > and when a clear-cut measure of accountability can be achieved.   These conditions are largely satisfied when monetary policy is primarily geared at  achieving price stability.  
Especially if we compare this with monetary policy disciplined by a dual mandate,  which is - in Volcker's words (2012) - "operationally confusing and ultimately  illusionary".7   

3-2: Second, the ECB should continue to explain the rationale behind its unconventional  monetary policy measures to the public.   While most major central banks have employed unconventional monetary policy in  response to the crisis, the exact measures and foundations have differed significantly  across central banks. The ECB's approach differs from that of the other major central banks in that its  unconventional monetary policy measures aim to support the effective transmission  of monetary policy to the economy, instead of delivering a direct stimulus.   In this sense, ECB's unconventional monetary policy measures are a complement to,  rather than a substitute for, standard monetary policy.8   They aim to restore a more normally functioning transmission mechanism and  contribute to an environment where standard measures can operate effectively.   Underlying this approach is the euro area's financial structure: in the euro area,  banks are the main agents for channeling funds from savers to borrowers, while in  many other countries market-based financing predominates.   The largely bank-based structure of financing in the euro area is reflected in the  ECB's monetary policy and in the design of its unconventional monetary policy.   It could hence be argued that ECB's unconventional monetary policy measures are  "purely" monetary policy. And, I would add, should also remain there.    

4-1: Third, the ECB should take the specific modalities of the unconventional monetary  policy-measures into account. For these modalities might influence the extent to  which central bank independence is at risk.   After all, large-scale outright asset purchases will result in a different risk profile for  the central bank's balance sheet than unconventional monetary policy directed at  providing liquidity support to the banking system in collateralized operations. In my view, one particularly nice feature of the bulk of ECB's unconventional  monetary policy measures concerns its "natural" or "embedded" exit.   This makes the ECB less sensitive to political pressure than in a situation in which it  would have to make an explicit choice for unwinding.   

4-2: For instance, one of the key elements of the ECB's response to the intensification of  the sovereign debt crisis was the design of the Longer-Term Refinancing Operations  or LTROs.   These LTROs ensured that banks had sufficient liquidity over the medium term, while  at the same time embedding phasing-out as a design feature. Or in other words,   the exit was taken into account up front.  

4-3: Fourth, the ECB should be clear about the limits of monetary policy and manage  expectations of what it can achieve.   This is important because central banks are - undeservedly - considered to be the  only player with room for maneuver and therefore subject  to unreasonable  expectations of what monetary policy might achieve.   These expectations should be downplayed to avoid disappointment with the public  and the political pressure that might follow.9   In particular, the ECB should stress that the problems in the euro area are not  problems that monetary policy can completely solve, as they are rooted in  weaknesses in banks' balance sheets, weak government finances and  the supply  side rigidities in many economies.   All the ECB could do is providing "breathing space" for banks and governments to  act, and it has done so.   

4-4: Fifth, at the same time, the ECB should try to sustain or provide the right incentives to  governments and banks.  As regards governments, sound public finances are an important underpinning of  central bank independence.  Conducting an independent monetary policy is made significantly more difficult in the  event of large budget deficits.10 A similar story could be told for labour and especially  product market reforms.  That is why I very much welcomed the explicit conditionality in the form of an ESM  programme in the Outright Monetary Transactions scheme.  This ensures that governments make the necessary efforts to restore the  sustainability of public finances, reform the supply side of their economies and in  doing so contribute indirectly to central bank independence.   

For banks, such conditionality hasn't been used so far. However, given that it is very  important to provide the right incentives, it might be worthwhile to explore whether  some kind of conditionality might be introduced for banks in the as yet unforeseen  case of new liquidity stress in the euro area.    
For instance, it might be investigated whether the provision of additional liquidity  could be made conditional on strict asset quality reviews or efforts to build up  adequate capital.  

This would contribute directly to restoring the health of the financial system and the  transmission mechanism.   
As a consequence, this would lessen the need to sustain unconventional monetary  policy over a longer period, and hence also contribute indirectly to reducing the  pressure on central bank independence.   

5-3: Finally, such an approach would help to address the unpleasant side-effects of earlier  unconventional monetary policy measures.   I'm referring for instance to how banks have used LTROs to buy higher-yielding  sovereign bonds, and thus contributed to the diabolic loop between governments and  banks instead of having an impulse to lend to the real economy.   Finally, as we all know, central bank independence is sustainable only if it is  accompanied by strong accountability and a high level of transparency.11   As the ECB's role in policy making has increased significantly during the crisis, it  needs to find ways to further enhance transparency and accountability.   
The public needs to be explained in the clearest possible terms why the ECB has  opted, or not opted, to take certain measures.  

5-4: A richer way of communicating our deliberations would definitely contribute to this.   More openness would also give the public a more balanced impression of the  discussions conducted in the Governing Council.  This, in turn, would support the predictability and credibility of our monetary policy.   

5-5: At the same time, we should avoid that more openness about the deliberations in the  Governing Council leads to enormous pressure on the Governors of national central  banks and puts the independence of the Governing Council members at risk.   Members are acting in the interest of the euro area as a whole, but often have to  
explain these decisions to a national audience.   

5-6: Therefore, a richer way of communicating our deliberations will sharpen the  
European mandate. Increased transparency should not jeopardize this important  building block of our institution. I therefore believe that we should stick to the principle  of collective rather than individual accountability.    

Let me conclude: "Independence can't just be a slogan".12   

The preservation of central bank independence in a democratic society ultimately  depends on asking reasonable deliverables from the central bank.   
At the same time, as society changes, the interpretation of "reasonable deliverables"  might change over time, and hence the preference for central bank independence.   

This has implications for both central banks and governments.   
Central banks should not take their independence for granted, but protect it  continuously.13   

Governments, on the other hand, should not put all their hopes on central banks.   

Instead, they should explain the fundamental reasons behind their choice to delegate  powers to an independent central bank14, ánd at the same time do their own job.  




                                                       
1 Het DNB-artikel waarop deze speech is gebaseerd zal worden opgenomen  in een binnenkort te verschijnen  
bundel van bijdragen aan deze conferentie..   
2The quotes from David Ricardo are cited in Orphanides (2010), Monetary policy lessons from the crisis, CEPR  
Discussion Paper, No. 7891.   
3 See, for example, Bini Smaghi (2007), Central bank independence: from theory to practice, speech at the  
conference Good governance and effective partnership.  
4 See for example Bernanke (2011), Central Bank Independence, Transparency and Accountability, remarks at  
the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference.   
5 This point was first raised by Orphanidus (2010).   
6 See, for example, Murray (2013), Exits, spillovers and monetary policy independence, remarks to the Canadian  
Association  for Business Economics, or Borio (2011), Central banking post-crisis: What compass for uncharted  waters?, BIS Working Paper, No. 353.  
7 See Volcker (2013), The Fed & Big Banking at the Crossroads, The New York Review of Books.  
8 Cour-Thimann and Winkler (2013), The ECB's non-standard monetary policy measures: The role of  institutional factors and financial structure, ECB Working paper series, No. 1528. This ECB paper highlights  
how the rationale behind the ECB's non-standard measures differs from that underlying quantitative easing  policies. This and the following section draw heavily upon this working paper.  
9 See, for example, King (2013), Monetary policy: many targets, many instruments. Where do we stand?,  
remarks given at the IMF conference Rethinking Macro Policy II: First steps and early lessons.  
10 See Bini Smaghi (2007).  
11 See, for example, Amtenbrink (2005), The Three Pillars of Central Bank Governance - Towards a Model  
Central Bank Law or a Code of Good Governance?, in International Monetary Fund, Current Developments in  Monetary and Financial Law, Vol. 4, 101-132.  
12 Volcker, The Fed & Big Banking at the Crossroads, The New York Review of Books.  
13 See also Issing (2013), A new paradigm for monetary policy? CFS Working paper, No. 2013/02.  
14 See also Bini Smaghi (2013).  








6  

