David Cameron and Enrico Letta gave a joint press conference in Downing Street on 17 July 2013.
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-and-prime-minister-letta-press-conference 
Prime Minister David Cameron
Good afternoon everybody. I'm delighted to welcome Enrico on his first official visit to London, but he is course an old friend of this country, and he made a great contribution at the G8 in Northern Ireland last month. Britain's relationship with Italy is one of the closest that we have. We're proud to serve alongside Italian forces in Afghanistan, and we're proud of what we achieved together in Libya.
We've also shown what we can do when we joined forces in Brussels to get the EU budget into better shape and to support economic growth. And we have a wealth of business ties, as we've seen actually in the last few days with the new agreement to pipe gas from BP's field in Azerbaijan to homes and business in Italy. But we believe that we can have even more impact still, and that is what we've been discussing today. We share a strong ambition to do more to turn Europe's economy around, and to create the new jobs that we need.
2-1: Now Britain and Italy face different contexts - Italy is in the Euro, Britain is not, Britain is not going to be. But sorting out the economy is an urgent priority for both of us. So we're both making hard-won progress to get control of spending, so we can escape the debt crisis that weighs our economies down. We joined forces in Brussels last month to bring the same control to EU spending, and we agree on the importance of the steps underway to bring financial stability to the eurozone. But we also know a lot more work is needed to reform the EU and to tackle the crisis of competiveness that holds Europe back in this global economic race.
So we've agreed to put real political commitment behind the talks to open Europe's trade with the wider world, especially the EU - US free trade talks, which we launched at Lough Erne last month, which could add £100 billion to Europe's economy. We're making common cause to reduce EU burdens that get in the way of businesses growing and creating jobs. I've established here in the UK a business task force to identify what rules need to be scrapped and changed, and we've agreed to build on this with good strong proposals to take to the next European Council, the October Council, together.
And we're going to work together to take the G8 trade, tax and transparency agenda into the G20 and beyond so the rules of the world economy actually deliver jobs and growth, both for our economies and the developing world. Now people may not talk about an Anglo-Italian engine in Europe, but what's clear is how much we share this reforming vision for a more open and competitive European Union.
And Enrico, I was very struck by what you said in your interview with the BBC yesterday about the need for reform in Europe and more flexible Europe that would benefit all of us. That's at the heart of my approach to the European Union, and it's what I think will make Europe a powerful economic force in the world again. And I believe it's essential to win confidence and consent of people at home for this agenda.
So, a warm welcome, a great friend of Britain, but it's great to have you here as Prime Minister and very much enjoying working with you on all of these issues. Enrico.

1


