The Prime Minister David Cameron gave a press conference at the European Council in Brussels.
2014-10-24

Good afternoon and welcome. It has been 24 hours in Brussels with some notable and important successes, but also with some deep frustrations and frankly quite a bit of anger about the way we have been treated.
First of all, let me deal with the good news, because there is good news. In facing Ebola we are facing one of the worst public health emergencies in a generation, and I have been absolutely determined that Britain, with other countries, will lead the way in dealing with this. Dealing with it because there is a massive crisis in West Africa, and we should feel some moral obligation as a wealthy country to help. But also, dealing with it because it directly threatens our national interest and our people in the United Kingdom, and that is why we have taken such a leading role. Britain has already pledged over £205 million; we have British troops going to West Africa; we have British health workers in West Africa and we are using all the resources that we have to help bring this crisis under control.
And we played a leading role here in Europe. I said I wanted to come to this European Council and get other countries in the European Union to more than double the EU effort, to get €1 billion committed. And I can tell you now, at this press conference, that is what we have achieved. Over €1 billion across Europe will be galvanised and spent on dealing with this issue. It is an example of where Britain in Europe can lead on these issues, can demonstrate a leading role in this issue, and can win over others and get things done. Get things done that will be good for Africa, but actually good for us in the United Kingdom as well. It's a great example where doing the right thing is clearly in the national interest, and shows that our aid budget, when properly used, can be brought absolutely into helping with the national interest.
Read UK secures €1 billion European Ebola commitment.
The second issue has been climate change, where I want to make sure Europe is playing its part in delivering a global deal that can prevent dangerous climate change. I think it was very important that Europe stepped up to the plate, and we have done that, with committing ourselves to more than 40% reductions of greenhouse gases by 2030. But I also think it's important we try and do this at the least cost: at the least cost to our industries, at the least cost to our consumers and at the least cost to families up and down Britain who don't want to pay any more on their energy bill than they otherwise should have to. And I believe that is what we have achieved with the deal that was signed yesterday. When these previous deals were done, there were binding targets on renewables, binding sub-targets, rather than just saying, 'How do we get greenhouse gases down?' We've not made that mistake this time; we only have one binding target, which is the 40% reduction in greenhouse gases. The other targets about renewables, about energy efficiency, they don't have any national targets. That is what Britain wanted; that is what Britain has achieved. And once again, I think it shows that we can on these issues in Europe, we can lead, we can win, we can get the right outcome.
That's the good news. Now for the frustrations. The first is obviously it is frustrating that the European economies aren't growing faster. We've seen Britain's growth figures out today and it shows broadly based and relatively strong economic growth. We're now growing at 3% a year. It's good that construction and manufacturing are showing strong like-for-like growth over the last year. We're building homes, we're building businesses, we're making things again in Britain; you can see a strong recovering economy, with an economic plan that is working, and that is putting our people back to work, with almost 1.8 million more people in work than the day I became Prime Minister.
3-1: That is very positive. But we have to be frank. There are threats to the British economy, from slow growth in Europe, and challenges in other parts of the world. And so it's very important to play a role here in encouraging other countries to make the structural reforms that we've made, to make sure people set and stick to targets in terms of deficit reduction and make sure that Europe does the key deals in terms of completing the single market and services, signing trade deals with the fastest growing parts of the world, the things that will make a difference to get this continent, to get these economies growing faster, which would be good for them and good for Britain.
That's the frustration. But that leads me on to frankly the downright anger about something that has come about at this European Council. And that is the completely unjustified and sudden production of a bill for Britain of £1.7 billion, over €2 billion, that is apparently supposed to be paid by 1st December. This is completely unacceptable. It is an unacceptable way for this organisation to work, to suddenly present a bill like this for such a vast sum of money with so little time to pay it, and it is an unacceptable way to treat one of the biggest contributors to the European Union.
That is why this morning I interrupted the Council meeting that was discussing the economy, and said that before we went any further this had to be discussed urgently, and we needed to start to seek a resolution to it urgently. And in that I was supported by the Italian Prime Minister, by the Dutch Prime Minister, by the Maltese Prime Minister, the Greek Prime Minister and others. And so there will be an emergency meeting of finance ministers to discuss what has happened, and I think it's vital that that happens.
Let me just make a couple of points about this. First of all, now, according to the Commission, it is an estimate; it is not a final figure, and we need to make sure the Commission start answering questions and the experts start answering questions about how on earth these numbers were arrived at. Because let me put it like this, of course in an organisation like this if your economy grows a little faster or your economy grows a little slower there are adjustments and there can be adjustments ever year, and we've seen them. Sometimes you pay a little bit more, sometimes you pay a little bit less, but it has never been the case that a €2 billion bill has suddenly been presented. And it is not acceptable, it is an appalling way to behave, I'm not paying that bill on 1 December. If people think I'm going to - then they've got another think coming. It is not going to happen.
These emergency meetings need to take place. The figures need to be thoroughly investigated. An explanation of how this happened needs to be properly produced. But people should be in no doubt, as an important contributor to this organisation, we are not suddenly going to get out our cheque book and write a cheque for €2 billion. It is not happening.

4


