Statement by the Taoiseach on the Meeting of the European Council Brussels, 18-19 December 2014
 
1-1: This week's meeting of the European Council is an important opportunity to demonstrate that the Union is taking further concrete steps to address the lagging growth rates and high unemployment which characterise the current economic situation across Europe. It will focus in particular on setting out the strategic orientations of a plan to boost investment levels in Europe. It will also consider issues relating to the 2015 European Semester. In addition, I expect that the European Council will underline the Union's firm commitment to tackling aggressive tax planning and unfair tax avoidance, as part of broader global efforts in this regard.
On the external relations front, the European Council will return to consider the situation in Ukraine, which remains worryingly fragile. Commission President Juncker and High Representative Mogherini will provide an update on actions taken by the EU in response to the Ebola crisis. Finally, the European Council may again consider how the EU can most effectively stem the flow of fighters from our countries to conflict zones.
This week's European Council will, of course, be the first since Presidents Tusk and Juncker, and their respective teams, took up their new positions. I look forward to working closely with them both over the period ahead.
Improving the investment framework in Europe
A Cheann Comhairle
1-3: The Irish economic recovery remains firmly on course. We expect GDP growth of 4.7% this year, and, according to the Commission's forecasts, Ireland will be Europe's fastest growing economy. The tough decisions already taken by the Government will bring the deficit below 3% of GDP next year, allowing us to exit the Excessive Deficit Procedure. ignificantly, our unemployment rate is falling, down to 10.7% from a high of 15.1% in 2012.
This positive outlook is tempered by the fact that recovery in the wider Union is feeble at best. GDP growth this year is expected to be around 1.3% for the EU as a whole, and as low as 0.8% in the euro area. The situation is compounded by extremely low inflation. In its Autumn Forecasts, the Commission acknowledges that risks are tilted to the downside.
A prolonged period of economic stagnation in Europe would undoubtedly present serious challenges for Ireland's future economic growth. Sitting back and waiting for recovery to take hold spontaneously is simply not an option. It is very welcome that, in his first remarks as President of the European Council, Donald Tusk made explicit reference to 'the need for ruthless determination to end the economic crisis'.
The focus this week will be on how to improve Europe's investment framework and simultaneously boost investment levels. Productive investment in the EU is still lagging 15% behind pre-crisis levels, making it clear that concerted and creative action is required to get the necessary levels of investment flowing again.
Our discussions will centre on the Investment Plan for Europe, which was proposed recently by President Juncker. The Plan aims to mobilise €315 billion in net additional investments in the real economy over the next three years. The proposals are designed to attract private investors by reducing complexity and sharing risk, delivering priority projects with both economic and social benefits that would not otherwise be realised.
The Investment Plan has three key strands:
· the creation of a new European Fund for Strategic Investments, which would deploy an initial guarantee of €16 billion from the EU budget and €5 billion from the EIB to leverage a total investment package of €315 billion, the bulk coming from private investors. Member States will also be encouraged to contribute to the seed capital of the Fund.
· the establishment of a credible investment project pipeline in tandem with an assistance programme to channel investments where they are most needed; and 
· an ambitious roadmap intended to make Europe a more attractive location for investment, including through removing regulatory barriers.
There are many aspects of the proposed new Fund that will require work over the period ahead - for example, governance arrangements, modalities for project selection, and how to ensure that private investment is leveraged to the maximum. The European Council will not be discussing the finer detail, but is instead expected to endorse the broad strategic orientations of the Plan. A legislative proposal to be brought forward by the Commission early next year will provide further operational detail.
At the European Council, I intend to convey Ireland's strong support for the establishment of the Fund, and for wider efforts to improve the investment climate in Europe. This includes making real and rapid progress on aspects of the Single Market which have yet to be delivered in full, in particular the digital agenda, energy union and the single market in services. It is also important that negotiations on trade agreements, especially those with the United States, be advanced urgently.
2-3: The Commission proposal to set up the Fund has received its share of criticism, with questioning from some quarters as to whether the leverage ratio of 1:15 is realistic. Of course, the Fund is not and cannot be a magic bullet. However, when implemented in tandem with structural reforms and growth-friendly fiscal consolidation, and with the full use of monetary policy instruments by the ECB, it does have the potential to make a tangible difference. It will complement already programmed expenditure under the Structural Funds, and the ongoing lending of the European Investment Bank.
Early and decisive implementation of the Fund and associated projects will be essential for the credibility of the initiative. That is why we are looking at the ambitious target of mid-2015 for mobilisation of the first new investments. Commission Vice President Katainen has already kicked off a 28-country roadshow to showcase the initiative, starting last Monday in Romania. The decisive backing of the European Council this week for the initiative will lend important impetus.
As the detail of the Fund is worked out, we will also be considering carefully how it might be of benefit to investment in Ireland. While project criteria must still be clarified, the factors likely to influence decisions are the added-value for the EU, over and above what is possible through existing instruments; economic viability and value; whether a project can commence in the coming three years; co-operation across frontiers; and, above all, the potential of the project to attract private investment.
3-1: Another important issue will be how the Commission will follow up on recent indications that it will look positively at capital contributions from the Member States when assessing how they are delivering on their Stability and Growth Pact commitments.
A Task Force led by the EIB and Commission recently compiled a list of projects from across Europe that could be considered ripe for investment, whether from the new Fund or elsewhere. Ireland, along with other Member States, submitted a broad list of projects across a range of economic sectors which could commence within the next three years. Given the timing constraints, this was very much intended as a preliminary and indicative list. It will of course be further examined and revised, and I expect narrowed down significantly, over the coming months.
3-3: Relevant Government Departments, co-ordinated by my own Department, will closely engage with the negotiation of the legislation setting up the Fund. They will also work to see if there are possible opportunities for Ireland, over and above those projects for which other funding sources are available. Of course, if the Fund helps significantly to boost investment and growth in the Union generally, that will also have knock-on positive effects for Ireland.
European Semester
3-4: Boosting investment is one of three pillars that will underpin the European Semester in 2015 - the other two being structural reform and fiscal responsibility. These are set out clearly in the Commission's recently-published Annual Growth Survey, and the European Council this week is expected to reaffirm its commitment to all three pillars.As Deputies will be aware, the Commission's opinions on Member States' Draft Budgetary 
3-5: Plans were also published recently. Ireland was one of five Member States found to be fully compliant with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact, along with Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Slovakia. This is a real vote of confidence in our management of our public finances. The Government is committed to continuing its policy of prudent fiscal management, as Ireland exits from the Excessive Deficit Procedure next year.
The European Council is also expected to welcome proposals made by the Commission to streamline the European Semester process. They are intended to facilitate more meaningful dialogue between Member States and the Commission before specific Country Specific Recommendations are proposed. Our aim here in Ireland is to use the new arrangements to support a richer national-level dialogue including with relevant Oireachtas Committees, and with economic and social interests, on how the European Semester can best feed into and reinforce our national recovery effort.

Economic policy coordination in the Economic and Monetary Union
3-6: The European Council is also expected to note that there will be a substantive discussion of economic co-ordination within the Economic and Monetary Union at its meeting next February, on the basis of initial work by the President of the Euro Summit (also President Tusk) with the heads of the Commission, the Eurogroup and the ECB. Ireland is ready to play a full and active part in discussions, and I will of course update the House accordingly in due course.
Taxation
It is now expected that the European Council will briefly consider tax avoidance and aggressive tax planning - issues which are currently very much in the media and political spotlight internationally. Ireland is committed to working with our partners in the EU, as part of a wider global effort, to tackle these issues. In this regard, the European Council is expected to look forward to the proposal recently promised by the Commission on the automatic exchange of information on tax rulings in the EU.
We are contributing very actively to the work in the OECD on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, which is essentially about modernising international tax administration and fitting it for the globalised world economy which is now a reality. 

What we have consistently stated is that from a tax policy perspective Ireland will play fair but will also play to win. This belief led the Government to make a number of amendments and enhancements to our tax regime to best position that regime for the future. These changes, announced on Budget day, were accompanied by a new Road Map for Ireland's Tax Competitiveness. 

This Road Map updates last year's International Tax Strategy and contains a comprehensive package of competitive tax measures which will help ensure that Ireland maintains and expands its position as a thriving hub for Foreign Direct Investment well into the future.
Our actions and commitments have been broadly welcomed, including by EU Commissioner Vestager and by the OECD.

At the European Council and in other EU fora, Ireland will contribute constructively to taxation-related discussions, as we always do, while simultaneously holding a firm line that matters of direct taxation remain a Member State competence. Let me underline once again that our single and transparent corporation tax rate of 12.5% is not under discussion. Our partners can have no doubts as to our unswerving determination on this.

Ukraine
The European Council will consider the current situation in Ukraine. I understand that President Tusk rightly sees this issue, and the general question of the EU's relationship with Russia, as the single most important geopolitical issue facing the Union. He believes it is timely to have a broad debate among leaders, although no proposals to change the EU's current policy or sanctions arrangements are on the table.
Ireland remains deeply concerned by the ongoing crisis, and in particular by the levels of violence and troop movement on the ground in Eastern Ukraine. While there has been some reduction in the level of violence in the past week or so, the situation clearly remains fragile. It is vital that all sides, including Russia, renew their commitments to the Minsk agreements and work to ensure that they are fully respected.
A lasting ceasefire remains key to the success of current efforts to reach a sustainable and peaceful end to this crisis. Such a resolution must be based on respect for Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and with clear guarantees on border security, disarmament of all illegal groups and the withdrawal of foreign forces.
The formation of a new government in Ukraine following the successful parliamentary elections in October is welcome. It must seize the mandate for reform given by the people of Ukraine, and move quickly to begin implementing much needed political, economic and constitutional reforms. A genuine and effective reform process must be an integral part of the strategy to help de-escalate and resolve the crisis.
We are hopeful that the EU's measures in relation to Russia, coupled with continued political and diplomatic engagement with the various sides involved in the conflict, will ultimately lead to a breakthrough and a negotiated solution to the conflict. The EU remains open to taking further steps as required, in light of developments on the ground.
The EU stands ready to support Ukraine at this time of transition, and through the challenges that lie ahead.
Minister Murphy will update the House on the remaining elements of the European Council agenda in his contribution. 
I will return to the House next month to report on the outcome of this week's meeting.
I would like to conclude by wishing Deputies, their families and staff, and of course all officials of this House a very happy Christmas!
Nollaig shona daoibh go léir.

