Hollande excerpt Carcassonne speech 19-05-2015

1-1: For three years, because it has finally become our fight, but it is the fight of all, the fight against tax fraud, tax evasion, tax optimization, tax havens, has made significant progress. Even in financial markets, what was our concern? Is it that interest rates can flare up because there were doubts about the eurozone, and what has happened? That interest rates have never been so low and so it is a way for us to also be able to finance and protect ourselves.
1-2: When I talk about Europe, that was also a difficult struggle, reorienting Europe. What do we see three years later? The parity between the euro and the dollar has now become more realistic, more in line with our interests and in particular with the interests of our exporting companies. We have allowed budget flexibilities to move towards reducing deficits, but at the right pace. We have obtained from the President of the Commission, Mr JUNCKER, an investment plan to support growth.
I would like to ask all the elected officials here, along with the government, to provide a certain number of projects, because here too, it is not enough to free up resources, but also to go and get them. We also ensured that the common agricultural policy could not only be preserved because some wanted to challenge it, but also because it was in our interest.
1-4: The European Central Bank, which we had sometimes criticized, was able, thanks to the pressure we put on, but also thanks to the lucidity that seized their leaders, to put in place a monetary policy that would allow precisely have lower interest rates. So who can deny that there has been a number of advances for Europe and France in the last three years? I know it's long, I know it's longer than expected. But to govern is not to click a button, or snap in your fingers. This is for conjurers, there is always.
We are not alone in Europe, that is the problem. I have often said, before I even became President of the Republic, that Europe would be so much simpler if there was only France.
The problem is that there is not only France, there are 27 others, and sometimes they would like to be equal with each other. So we have to convince, and to convince, we need to have a strong relationship with Germany. A strong relationship with Germany as it is, that is to say an economic power, capable of succeeding on many markets. But a Germany that also understands that there must be changes, that investment should be privileged, that unemployment is unbearable.
A Germany that has an aging population, and who knows well that it must compose, and in particular with France. It turns out that we, we have a demographics that is more dynamic, and Germany knows that it can count on the friendship of France in all circumstances. We demonstrated it, Angela MERKEL and myself, especially on the Ukrainian question, where we spent hours and hours, full night, to convince President PUTIN and the Ukrainian President POROCHENKO that we had to find a way out of crisis.
This is what can move Europe forward, the strength of friendship between France and Germany. This leads us, moreover, to preserve the German language in the reform of the college, I will come back to it, so that there are more young people who speak German, and even more German teachers. I have asked that the converse be true. But the Chancellor - rightly so - pointed out to me that it was not her responsibility, that it was the Länder, the German regions. So through you, I speak to all the German Länder: let's learn French as we are going to teach German to our young children.
But I also wanted to share with you my conviction, drawn from my experience for three years. It is about our ability to influence Europe, to move the world, to ensure even our own security. This ability depends on one thing in the long run, the strength of our economy. In the short term, we can always, thanks to what France represents, give our point of view and make it respected, and I have shown it in recent months. But in the long run, if we are not a strong economy, if we do not have strong businesses, if we do not have territories that, themselves, are robust, if we do not have this vitality , this activity, this creativity, this industry, this agriculture - and it is the role of the government to ensure it - then,we will no longer be able to play the role that is ours, and the one that our history has commanded us to do for today.
2-3: So that's why I've been making choices for three years: everything for jobs, everything for youth, everything for the future. When I came to the country's responsibilities, but is it finally the moment to say it, the euro zone was in a situation of doubts, one wondered even if the single currency was going to spend the summer, the growth was zero , the deficits were numerous, the state was bankrupt, it was not me who had said it. So my responsibility was not to deplore, it was not to hammer the degradation of the situation, it was to act and change. That's what I did with Jean-Marc AYRAULT, then with Manuel VALLS. I made choices, consistent with the national interest, because only the national interest counts. I made choices that were also in line with what I said during the campaign, and also consistent with the goals I set not to please, but to do: recovery of the public accounts, not because of a taste for accounting, but because it is the very principle of sovereignty. Besides, you are here elected officials, you put in order your public accounts, sometimes even, because, one creates you more difficult situations.
2-4: Today, France has achieved its goals, not yet, the 3%. We will have them, in relation to the national wealth, by 2017 and perhaps even before, at the pace we have. We will leave a country that will no longer have to go into debt beyond its capacity. It was necessary to save money, and without austerity, and I recall that in France, unlike many countries, there were no social benefits abolished, no wage cuts, no pension cuts, no dismissed civil servants , or reduced illness coverage. On the contrary, we preserved the social model, and we did well.

